 32K545 School Name: EBC HIGH SCHOOL FOR PUBLIC SERVICE–BUSHWICK Principal: SHAWN BROWN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information EBC High School for Public Service 32K545 K913 9 – 12 School Number (DBN): 1155 Dekalb Avenue, Brooklyn, New York, 11221 718-452-3440 Phone Number: 718-452-3603 Fax: Shawn Brown SBrown22@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Shawn Brown Ms. Favard Samary Trinidad Email Address: Parents’ Association President: Mr. Marc Engel, Ms. LatashaGray, SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Ms. Samary Trinidad MelannyBruno Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: AsanetGomez Geographical District: 32 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Janice Ross Superintendent: 1396 Broadway, Room 110, Brooklyn, New York, 11221 JRoss11@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: Office: 718 455 4635 718 455 4684 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn FSC: Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald   131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, New York, 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Shawn Brown Nicole Favard MagalyHernandez Ms. Angela Brown Daisy Rodriguez YenniferOrtiz FreidellyGucel *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Ms. Asanet Gomez – El Puente C.B.O Representative, if applicable Maria Colon Rosa Avila Kenya Guerero Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Marc Engel Latasha Gray Kimberly Romero-Sanchez Richard Fields JerronJohn Fatima DeLuna SamaryTrinidad AnayahVincent Cheyenne Constance Member/ Principal designee Member/ Principal designee Member/Teacher(U.F.T. member) Member/ Teacher (U.F.T. member) Member/ Teacher (U.F.T. member) Member/ PA Secretary Member/ Observer (parent coordinator) Member/ student Member/ Teacher (U.F.T. member)   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? For the 2018-2019 school year we are focused on engaging students in culturally relevant pedagogy, utilizing technology, creating professional learning communities, using qualitative/qualitative data to make instruction decisions, and expanding our college level/AP course offerings.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. E.B.C high school for public service is a small public school located in the heart of Bushwick. We serve a large population of E.S.L (English as Second Language) and Special Education students. We provide I.C.T (Integrated Co-teaching)models of instruction, adhere to Danielson’s framework for teaching, and infuse C.C.L.S/N.Y.S standards-aligned instruction throughout our classrooms. The core of our school is our advisory model. Addressing our students’ social-emotional concerns will in turn, improve their academic standing. Students have an advisory that follows him or her throughout their high school experience. As Paulo Frierie states throughout Pedagogy of the Oppressed, revolutionary leadership demands the radical love, the ability to dialog with people, and the desire to liberate the masses. As a school community, we believe that our job is to create a loving environment that inspires our students to be the very best version of themselves. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Based on our recent school performance dashboard our current amount of students within special student populations are as follows: 1. Students with disabilities – 25% 2. English Language Learners – 25% 3. Economic Needs – 87% Our students will special needs have varying challenges. Many of our students are classified as learning disabled, emotional challenged, and several are in need of additional speech services. Our E.S.L students represent a large proportion of our student population. Spanish is the primary language for the majority of our students. Academic and Social/Emotional Supports for ESL students: Social/Emotional Support - A large portion of our students are presently facing homelessness, living below the poverty line, and many another personal issues within their family. Because of this, our students are in need of additional social-emotional support. Have guidance counselors assigned to each grade level. Each guidance counselor is also bilingual. Having three bilingual guidance counselors helps address the needs of bilingual students. They can community with students and families in their native language. We have also created an advisory model for all ESL students. The model ensures that students are provided with social-emotional support from a staff member. We have created a curriculum and provided ongoing training to teachers. Students can build a healthy relationship with a group of students during the advisory session. They can address social-emotional issues and receive guidance from a staff member. Academic Support - Several staff members are dually trained as Bilingual instructors. During instruction, content is explained in both English and Spanish. Teachers also use the student's native language to provide support for ESL students. We follow a co-teaching model of instruction in which content area, special education, and ESL teachers offer guidance as a team. ESL students in need of necessary ESL support are given support courses before school, after school, and on the weekends. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 0  During the 2018-2019 school year, we improved specifically in the area of rigorous instruction. This was made evident by our improved outcomes on the school’s graduation rate. . The framework for great schools discusses the need for rigorous instruction. Rigorous instruction as been a challenge for several years within our school. This year we made a concentrated effort to improve our core beliefs about how quality instruction should look in each classroom. We developed a professional development calendar that was reflective and challenged teachers to consider innovative ways to engage our students. We transitioned to problem based learning activities in which students were required to use Meta-cognitive skills and consider several different ways to solve problems. Throughout the school we adopted a student centered teaching approach, while using AVID strategies. Specifically Cornell notes, collaborative learning in which the teacher was not the center of attention. Students were unable to passively be receptacles of information that they would then regurgitate. The framework also discusses the importance of developing a curriculum that is appropriately structured to meet the needs of all students: "A successful classroom requires a strong curriculum aligned to the Common Core learning standards that challenges students, scaffolds their experience, and is enlivened by teachers who are engaged in their craft. The curriculum must meet students where they are and customize inclusive, motivating instruction. Rigorous instruction aligns practice and content to Common Core strategies within and across grades." As stated earlier our instructional staff has made the decision to lead instruction through a student-centered model. We ensure that our students are engaged throughout the learning process as co-creators and facilitators of learning. Teachers challenge students to work in collaborative groups to challenge one another. Teachers act as facilitators of learning instead of simply providing students with information. Our theory of practices stems from Dewey's work around progressive education that can enhance democracy within society. We also share his notions of pragmatism in that the school’s curriculum should be of practical use for the students and community. We believe that educators should inspire students to want to learn based on intrinsic values, not simply to comply with rules and regulations enacted in the classroom. For the 2018-2019 school year, we are still focusing on improving instruction Specifically, we are interested in three areas: Culturally Relevant Pedagogy "Culturally relevant teaching is a term created by Gloria Ladson-Billings (1994) to describe “a pedagogy that empowers students intellectually, socially, emotionally, and politically by using cultural referents to impart knowledge, skills, and attitudes.” As a school, we are well aware of how the curriculum in many ways does not take into consideration the values, ethics, or culture of many minority groups. Statistics all articulate that education has systemically created a cultural caste system. Because of this, we have decided to develop culturally relevant pedagogical practices throughout all content areas. We are developing a team of teachers that are going to collect, analyze, and develop school-wide instructional 1  strategies to improve how teachers engage minorities within our school. We are also focusing on ensuring that E.S.L and special education students are provided with resources to have access to the general education curriculum. Technology "Blended learning. Blended learning is an education program (formal or non-formal) that combines online digital media with traditional classroom methods. It requires the physical presence of both teacher and student, with some element of student control over time, place, path, or pace." As a school, our goal is to have courses that have online components for each course. Because of this, we have purchased a Google suite and each teacher is being trained on how to create a Google classroom. The ultimate goal is to have the school become as paperless as possible. Data "Data Driven Instruction and Inquiry (D.D.I.) is a precise and systematic approach to improving student learning throughout the year. The inquiry cycle of data-driven instruction includes assessment, analysis, and action and is a key framework for school-wide support of all student success." We want all of our decisions to be based on data. Because of this initiative, we have created a data team. This team will speak to the school data and train teachers how to use data to funnel their teaching. We believe that if we address these three areas our student's academic progress will improve tremendously. In addition to the above mentioned areas of focus we are interested in expanding our AP level and college level course offerings. Presently we are working with L.I.U scholars, Medgar Evers, and Brooklyn College. Our new partnership with Columbia University will give our students the opportunity to take courses at an Ivy League school. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 32K545 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 498 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 6 5 5 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 1 N/A 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 86.7% % Reduced Lunch 21.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 88.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.09 3% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 72% 65% 66.9% 1.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 184 123 84.3% 1.8% 22.1% 8.4% 0.8% 0.4% 4 27% 12.3 N/A N/A 74% 69% 70.4% 5% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The framework articulates rigorous instruction in this manner – “A successful classroom requires a strong curriculum aligned to the Common Core, challenges students, scaffolds their experience, and is enacted by teachers who are engaged with their craft. The curriculum must meet students where they are and customize inclusive, motivating instruction. Rigorous instruction aligns practice and content to Common Core strategies within and across grades. This articulation of rigorous instruction calls educators to have students become leaders of instruction within the classroom. As a school we have taken a Critical theoretical approach towards educating our student. The text that we refer to in our practice as educators is “The Pedagogy of the Oppressed” – Paulo Frierie. We desire to have students partaken in the creation of curriculum, participate in educating their classmates, as well as their teachers. We desire to challenge students to not only receive content, but also deliver content in partnership with teachers. The designing of curriculum is monitored by administration, our peer collaborative teacher, and leads within each department. The alignment of C.C.L.S and N.Y.S standards are reviewed each marking period collaboratively with administration. Our school’s strengths is our ability to modify instruction for special needs students and providing dual language instruction for E.S.L students. Each year our staff provides supplemental instruction for students after school and on Saturdays. These programs provide specific subgroups with much needed additional instructional support. Though we have made great strides with these specific areas, we are still need to improve. Here is a list of our current needs as a school: Improving E.S.L instruction – We have added additional staff members to our ESL department. We presently have approximately 120 ESL students. This represents roughly a quarter of our school’s population. We now have three ESL teachers. We are in need of additional staff members to provide instruction and ensure that we are in full compliance based on new academic policies. Improving Special Education instruction – We also have roughly 110 special education students, which again represents a quarter of our population. Based on this population we have had challenges in terms of creating well balanced, differentiated instruction, that meets the academic/social-emotional needs of all students. We are 4  currently reviewing different instructional structures that benefits the needs of the students. We have several students transitioning from self contained classrooms and moving into I.C.T classrooms. Since last year we have hired additional special education and E.S.L teachers. These new staff members played an important part in our quantitative improvements. Many of our students in these two subgroups were able to take and pass courses that they were unable to in the past.. We now must ensure that teachers are receiving quality professional development and training to continue their pedagogical improvements. We do not believe in teaching our students as if their challenges are deficits. We believe that their language and specific learning styles (visual, kinesthetic, musical) are actually assets that we as teachers must learn how to incorporate into out teaching. Data Points - School graduation rates improved - Between the 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 we have seen a double digit percentage growth in our graduation percentage. This can be attributed to the additional supports that we have been providing for our special education and ESL students. In addition I believe that social-emotional supports in place contribute to the improve of our students performance for all subgroups. REgents scores Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Staff teams – Instructional Cabinet – Each week the school will have instructional cabinet team meetings to assess teacher needs for support collaboratively with key stakeholders within the school. Culture, Technology and Data Teams – We will have teams focused on each specific topic. Each group will Team – An advisory team will be constructed, meet weekly, evaluate student data, meet with parents, provide supplemental academic opportunities for 12th grade students, to improve upon our current graduation rate. Administrative Team meetings - Each week the administrative team will meet to discuss observation tracking, patterns noticed, whole school areas of weakness, components that need to be considered based on student needs, etc. 1. Teacher-led professional development team – Each week a holistic team of teachers will meet with administration to design data-responsive professional development. This team will consist of pedagogues from various content areas. Each week questionnaire, ethnographic information, and various forms of quantitative data will be used to inform the professional development calendar. Administration will ensure that the school's instructional focus (3B questioning and discussion) is addressed through teacher-led professional development weekly. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students September 2018-June 2019 AP, Principal, Lead Teacher, all grades 9th - 12th Sept 2018- June 2019 all instructional staff Principal, Assistant Principal, PD coordinator, Peer Teacher collaborator, ESL teacher, 6 1. Special education, E.S.L, and general education teacher team work – Teachers will meet on a weekly basis to discuss students’ needs in relation to curriculum development, consider models of instruction that meets the needs of specific grade levels, and evaluate effective pedagogical modifications needed to address student needs. 1. Parent Engagement – Parents will have the opportunity to meet with staff members on a weekly basis to discuss student achievement and build strong partnerships with members of the school community. The school will host a series of workshops training parents in understanding C.C.L. S aligned curriculum. all instructional staff Parents 9th - 12th th grade students September 2018 - 2019 administration, special education team members, Peer collaborative teacher, E.S.L team members September 2018-2019 administration, special education team members, Peer collaborative teacher, E.S.L team members 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During S.L.T team meetings parents will also have the opportunity to learn about what the school is doing regarding instruction. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Meet with SLT team on a monthly basis to listen to the concerns, thoughts, and issues of all parents. 2. Create opportunities for parents to speak with staff and administration about concerns. 3. Meet with the parent coordinator, PTA president, and members of the SLT team to establish clear lines of communication. 4. Create a monthly newsletter discussing essential events within the school. 5. Send weekly phone calls to parents regarding important events happening within the school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress towards this goal will happen in a several ways. 7  1. Clear lines of communication – The school will establish clear lines of communication to parents. We will use newsletters, parent meetings, text messages, voice message, leaflets, and many other forms of communication. Parents will be made aware of critical information as it pertains to the school. 2. Regularly meeting – Parents will have the opportunity to meet with administration on a daily basis. The school will employ an open door policy for all parents at any time throughout the day Parent meetings will take place monthly. SLT meetings will be used to speak with parent leaders. All parents will be invited to observe. 3. Assessment – We will regularly assess the effectiveness of communication with parents via anonymous surveys, questionnaires, interviews, and focus groups. Administration team members will meet with parent leadership team to review minutes of meetings. We will survey parents to ensure that their needs have been articulate and addressed by the school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) DOE advance, scholarship report meetings, surveys, and advisory team meeting agendas. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school uses an advisory model. Each student is given an advisory that travels with the student from the first year of high school until graduation. Within the advisory students develop healthy relationships, learn how to develop conflict resolution skills, serve their community, mentor younger students, and receive support with social/emotional challenges they may face. Our goal is to improve upon this structure within the school. We desire to improve the students’ desire to learn and challenge them to become more actively engaged in the learning process. We desire to create an environment in which students are intrinsically motivated to achieve their academic aspirations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will conduct at least 4 town hall meetings, create a functioning student government, and start at least 4 affinity groups after school for students. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Guidance Team – The guidance team will create focus groups to address student’s social emotional needs. Guidance will also meet with administration on a weekly basis to discuss students that are in high need of support. Special education students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Special education teachers Each guidance counselor will be assigned to a specific grade. Each counselor will produce progress reports for their students that are in danger of failing courses or that have behavioral problems within the school. We will also create affinity groups for students in specific groups. these groups will be made by students and Restorative Justice Program – Students will learn soft skills in terms of negotiation, compromise, conflict resolution, and how to resolve issues in a productive manner. Senior students will lead this work. Senior students will be selected based on their college/career interests around social work, guidance, and psychology, etc 12th grade students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Professional Development – Teachers will be provided with professional development around dealing with student behavior, classroom management skills, etc. All staff Sept 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal, Principal, (Dean), administrative team members, and guidance department members Administration and Peer Collaborative Teacher. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 0  advisory at least twice each semester. Parents will also speak with an adviser during our school’s meet the staff evening sessions. Advisers will provide progress reports to all students within their advisory group each marking period. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. · Family workers will be used to meet with students will consistent behavior problems. · Parent Coordinator – Will be used to help translate for Spanish speaking parents, provide training for parents, and discuss the concerns of parents at S.L.T meetings. · E.B.C/I.A.F – Will provide outreach services to parents and families within the community. · El Puente – Will work with E.S.L students and parents within the school on a weekly basis. · Curriculum development, instructional practices, and assessment – Teachers will be trained on how to develop engaging curriculum, develop engaging instructional practices for ESL/Special Education students, and assess the implementation of these initiatives. · Technology - Will be used to provide alternative instructional models for students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A 21st Century Grant SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Weekly meetings will be held to assess improvement in student behavior. 2. Monthly meetings will be held with parents of students with consistent behavior issues. These meetings will continue to take place until June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher-led, data driven professional development – We have restructured our school program to ensure that all teachers are given ample time to participate in professional development. Teachers are also responsible for collecting school wide data around teacher practice, student outcomes, teacher responses, and create professional development for teachers. The strength of our school is our ability to work in a holistic manner regarding professional development. Again we take a critical theorist perspective that calls for all constituents to participate in professional development. Staff, administrators, teachers, and students have equal validity when designing professional development. We also follow a pragmatic approach in terms of creating professional development that has a function, direction, cause, and serves to meet the needs of all members of the school community. In terms of needs, we desire to improve upon teacher participation in professional development committees. We want all teacher to share best practices with their colleagues. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. data-driven, whole staff professional development in collaboration with the administration team. Teachers teams will meet weekly to review student data, pedagogical practices, and grade level improvements. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Advisory Teams – Grade level advisory teams will meet weekly to collaborative develop curriculum, discuss the effectiveness of their pedagogical practices, and assess student achievement. All instructional staff Sept 2018 - June 2019 AVID teacher teams – The school will develop an AVID team that will ensure that all AVID students are given training in W.I.C.O.R strategies, tutoring, AVID courses, and college/career readiness training. ESL/Bilingual Instruction – The school’s ESL department will meet weekly with the administrative team to assess students’ access to the curriculum and possible resources that can be purchased to support these students. Co-teacher Planning – Special Education and General education teachers will meet once every two weeks for approximately 1 hour to develop curricula that meets the needs of Special, ESL, and general education students. Curriculum and pedagogical modifications will be monitored each marking period by administration using student data. All instructional staff September 2018 – June 2019 Shawn Brown, Latasha Gray, Nia Johnson, Marc Engel, Darnese Olivieri, members fo the instructional cabinet team and the professional development team. Brown, Gray, Engel, Darnese Olivieri, special education department, instructional cabinet, and the professional development team members. Parent Engagement – Parent meetings will be held monthly. During this time parents will have the opportunity to review curriculum, meet with teachers, discuss concerns around instruction, etc. All students and all parents Sept 2018- June 2019 Samary Trinidad, Nia Johnson 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 3  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent coordinator, parent volunteers, co-op students, per session for teachers and administration, materials for newsletters, postage for parents, adult education services for parents, outreach program for new students, , EL Puente to reach out to parents within the community. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● During monthly meetings with the S.L.T team members. ● During scholarship reports each marking period. ● Wednesday grade team meetings will be dedicated to evaluating teacher practice through inter-visitation, lesson tuning, virtual lesson observations, etc. ● Tracking of teacher observations in advance. Mid-point benchmark - By February monthly agendas, minutes, scholarship reports, professional development data will be collected to re-assess our progress towards meeting this goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Professional development committee meetings, departmental meetings, grade team meetings, and I.C.T meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school we believe that educational leadership is the most influential component of any educational facility. We aspire to create an environment of collaboration, develop a sense of inclusiveness, and raise the entire school community’s expectations around student achievement. Though we have grown in this areas we still need to improve our ability to make strategic programmatic modifications and appropriately use resources (human and fiscal). The administrative staff believes that we must model exemplary instruction. Because of this each administration presently teaches or co-teaches a course. We believe that educators should be practitioners consistently acting and reflecting upon what we are teaching. We follow a naturalistic inquiry approach in which we engage with the community at every level. This is done to excavate the thematic narratives of our students and teachers. We develop a common language through engaging in the work and assess our own practices as a team. Our needs in terms of improving upon this area is consistently providing thorough, timely feedback to teachers in a manner that leads to improved instructional practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Their ratings will be based on personal leadership, data, curriculum/instruction, staff/community, and resources/operations 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? AVID program – The school will be training teachers through AVID. Administration will also be trained in this program in order to support teachers. Admin, all instructional staff. Sept 2018 - June 2019 Shawn Brown, Latasha Gray, Mr. Engel, Ms. Nia Johnson AP – Specific teachers will receive training for AP courses. An AP track will be created in each subject area. ICT training – Teachers will receive training through Borough offices. Teachers will be trained in planning instruction for all sub-groups, while paying special attention to the needs of students with special needs, based on IEP annual goals. Teacher-Lead professional development – Model teachers will be selected to lead professional development around best instructional practices. Integrated Co-teaching professional development – Teachers will be provided with extensive professional development around ICT models of instruction, modifications for special education students, and best instructional practices. Inter-visitations/Video club – Teachers will be provided with training via inter-visitation with other schools and teachers within the building. Teachers will also be given the opportunity to work collaboratively and independently from administration through our school’s video club. Administrators Teach/Lab sites – All administrators will teach or co-teach a course and utilize this class as a lab site for the school. Administrators will create lesson plans, units of student, and model exemplary pedagogy for teacher and students. Teacher observations and feedback - Teacher observations will be given to each teacher within one week of an observation within specific attention to 3B (Questioning and discussion) 6 We have already established and will continue our schools’ S.I.F.E and S.T.H programs. 9 th - 10 th grade ESL Sept 2018– June 2019 Mr. Engel Parent meetings and outreach - Our school’s Parent association will continue to meet monthly and also during the school’s S.L.T team meetings. Parents will have the opportunity to discuss concerns and make suggestions regarding the educational leadership of the building. Administrative Professional development – All administrators will receive job embedded professional development via the district office and educational consultation. All parents and students Sept 2018 – June 2019 Samary Trinidad, Nia Johnson Administration Sept 2018- June 2019 Shawn Brown, Darnese Olivieri 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the 2018-2019 school year, parents will be provided with surveys, questionnaires, and interviewed in person to ascertain their thoughts about the school’s leadership team. parent-teacher conferences and during our school’s meet the staff nights. The data will be collected and analyzed by the administrative team. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Professional development for school leadership ● S.L.T team ● Parent outreach ● Instructional Cabinet team ● Video club ● Internal and External inter-visitation ● Professional development and Curriculum development training for administration and staff Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Each marking period during the 2018-2019 school year school surveys, questionnaires, and feedback templates will be created for staff members to discuss their needs regarding support and leadership. Instructional team meetings will take place each month. The school’s professional development committee will co-plan with administration to ensure that teachers are being appropriately supported Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. · Professional development for school leadership · SLT team · Parent outreach · Instructional Cabinet team · Video club · Internal and External inter-visitation · Professional development and Curriculum development training for administration and staff Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school we have always been focused on engaging members of the school community. The importance of partnering with parents cannot be overstated. We aim to a welcoming environment in which parents provides the school with vital feedback about how we can better serve the students. We believe that communication to parents about their students’ progress towards academic goals is essential to students meeting those goals. Besides communication we believe that it is the school’s responsibility to provide parents with support in helping their child meet educational goals. As a school we still need to grow in our ability to share data in a way that promotes conversation amongst all stake holders. We also believe that the more we use data as the basis of our conversations with parents, it resolve many of the issues and concerns that teachers have. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. school engages parents in at least 10 family/community-based activities to celebrate parents, students, their cultures and strengthen relationships between families and the school community. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal , Assistant Principal, school leadership team, parent association, parent coordinator, guidance department, family workers, secretaries, • Professional development training for administration All parents Sept 2018 - June 2019 • Daily cabinet meetings for administrators. • Feedback sessions with parents, students, and teachers regarding educational leadership of the school. • Coaching on how to provide accurate, actionable feedback to teachers. • Parent Volunteer program • Parent Association conversations around how to improve school. • Outreach to incoming students • Newsletters to parents • Social events for parents – Father’s day celebration, Mother’s day celebration, holiday gatherings, etc. • Adult computer courses. • Exercise classes for families • Basic computer courses. • AVID training for administrators • Educational leadership training for administration via borough office. • 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 0  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. EBC, El Puente Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent coordinator, parent volunteers, co-op students, per session for teachers and administration, materials for newsletters, postage for parents, outreach program for new students, adult education services for parents, EL Puente to reach out to parents within the community, Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title II, Part A 21st Century Grant SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During or school’s monthly S.L.T (School Leadership Team) meetings, we will discuss the school’s progress towards this goal. We will also create internal surveys, questionnaires, and feedback templates to assess our progress towards this goal. We will provide all members of the school community with these forms during parent teacher conferences during the Fall and Spring semesters. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Learning environment survey responses and internal surveys of parents. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) School data via skedula, incoming student reports NYSESLAT scores and MOSL assessments School data via skedual, incoming student reports NYSESLAT scores, regents scores and mosl assessments School data via skedual, incoming student reports NYSESLAT scores School data via skedual, incoming student reports NYSESLAT scores At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Student I.E.P, consultation with parents, guidance department Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Close reading, annotation, balanced literacy, extended writing, Various AVID strategies Remedial math groups, I.C.T classes, Math Basic skills, Various AVID strategies Basic skills courses, regent prep, test taking courses, interactive writing, Regents prep, test prep, test taking skills courses, E.S.L courses, short response skills, close reading of historical documents, art, and cartoons Group, individual and partner groups. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small groups Small group – students are selected based upon data During the school day Before and after school, during the day and during Saturdays During the school day Small groups Small groups During the school day During the school day Small groups During the school day 2  evaluations, initial IEP recommendations. 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We have a total of 42 students that are classified as students in temporary housing. This is 8.45% of our total student population. Of the 42 students, 29 are doubled up, 11 are living in a shelter and 2 have other as their temporary housing status. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 4  In order to effectively support our students in temporary housing we do the following: 1. Develop strong partnerships with Central Office Staff- Mr. Wayne Harris, STH borough director keeps us abreast of all of the STH policies and protocols for our borough. We share data and discuss ways to collaborate with shelter based staff and educational liaisons. 2. Utilize school STH snapshot data- Each month a data report is pulled and shared with Guidance department and school staff. This provides a culture where STH students and families are managed with care and empathy. This means that an STH student may be late to school, dress code or in need of additional attention. Staff has a level of awareness so that STH students do not feel excluded or isolated. 3. STH EBC Liaison- A staff member has been assigned as the STH liaison. This person is responsible for ongoing communication, and decision making for STH students. 4. Set aside funds- Funds are used to support STH students. Incentives have included trips to plays, school supplies, and clothing. 5. SIMBA/ASET Program- Gender Based programs for STH students take place at 131 Livingston Street. At this time we have tenth grade students who will be enrolled in the program. The extended day programs will provide counseling, homework help, regent prep, and college counseling to students in the afternoon and on Saturday. Attendance tracking- Each week the attendance team meets to discuss the attendance of STH students. Shout-outs are provided for good attendance and individual conferences are held with the attendance team. At this time our STH attendance is 83.15% which we encourage students to reach 90% attendance as a benchmark. Chronic absent students are flagged and monitored. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. Outside counseling, clothing, grooming kids, additional clothing, materials for school, 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation 5 Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We did not receive this allocation. 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Towards the end of each school year the instructional cabinet team meets to discuss the instructional needs of the school. One member from each department discusses the strengths, weaknesses, and necessary next steps to improve the instructional fortitude of the department. Our school’s data analyst then discusses patterns and trends within the student’s assessments. For example: Last year we realized that several of our special education students were having difficulty with basic multiplication, reading comprehension, etc. Because of this we realized that we needed to hire additional special education staff members to supplement the work that was happening in our ICT classrooms. We also decided to augment some of the ICT classrooms and create self-contained models for students that were in severe need. We then began to reach out to Teach For America and the Teaching Fellow Program. We had six members of that program teach during our summer school session. During this process each teacher is paired with a veteran teacher. The administrative staff then plans lessons with the teacher, performs mock observations, and provides the teachers with feedback on how to improve their pedagogy. This gives us a realistic example of how the teacher that we are interested in hiring works with our population over a two month period. After summer school is finished, the teachers are formally interviewed. The teachers that perform the best out of the group are hired for the fall semester. The veteran teacher then becomes their mentor for the following school year. This process has helped us in hiring highly qualified teachers that understand the unique needs of our student population. As a school we believe in providing teachers will multiple entry points for professional development. I believe that this is why we have such a low teacher turnover rate within our school. Teachers are provided with professional development via network personnel, collaborative team meetings, faculty meetings, administration, our learning buddy program, lead teachers, instructional leads, mentoring program, etc. Teachers are given objective factual feedback that is only used to support teachers, not punitively. Strategies for recruitment – As a school we believe in recruiting the best talent for our students we have several students in need of ELL and special education services. Therefore we attend all teacher fairs during the school year and over the summer. We have a partnership with Teach for America and the NYC Teaching Fellows program. Both programs send teachers to our school to work with our students. During this time we are able to train and evaluate teachers. After the summer courses are completed we then select the best candidates for the positions that we have available. Strategies for retention – As a school we believe in supporting veteran teachers. The veteran teachers in our school are provided with several forms of professional development. We do this in order to ensure that all teachers regardless of how long they have been teaching are given the opportunity to grow in current and learn new teaching 7  strategies. We provide professional development through peer groups via the school’s network, grade teams, department teams, lab site classroom, the school’s lead teacher, and also through frequent cycles of observations from administration. Assignments – We assign teachers to courses in which they have shown proficiency. The level of proficiency is evaluated through student out comes. We evaluate state, local exams and make decisions based on these quantitative measures. We also assign each new teacher a mentor for the entire year. Each new teacher also meets with administration each week to create lesson plans, unit plans, review observation notes, etc. The school also provides support for teachers via the school’s lead teacher. During the summer the school’s instructional lead team meets to discuss the best assignments for all teachers. The school presently uses the HOUSSE program to assist teacher with becoming highly qualified. Through network support several teachers that have been assessed and documented as not being highly qualified. After this process has taken place 18 We have referred several teachers to this program. Below is a brief description of how the program assists teachers. This description was cited from the program’s web page. HOUSSE: High, Objective, and Uniform State Standard of Evaluation An alternative method to assessing teacher subject matter competency is the High, Objective, and Uniform State Standard of Evaluation (HOUSSE). HOUSSE allows current teachers to demonstrate subject matter competency and Highly Qualified Teacher (HQT) requirements through a combination of proven teaching experience, professional development, and knowledge in the subject acquired over time through working in the field. Some examples of requirements that States use to measure a teacher’s competency in his or her subject area are writing curriculum, assessments, or both; teaching a course at an institution of higher learning; being a peer mentor; receiving regional, national, or State teaching awards; and having a certain amount of teaching experience, just to name a few. Hours spent completing the requirements earn a certain number of points that each teacher must accumulate to prove that he or she is highly qualified. A teacher may choose this route instead of demonstrating competency through examination, college major, college major equivalency, graduate degree, or advanced certification in the core content area taught. Differentiated Professional Development – The staff has collaboratively developed a yearlong professional development calendar that is structured around CIE (City wide instructional Expectation), TEP (Teacher Effectiveness Program), and Danielson’s Framework for teaching. Network Support and Professional Development – Teachers have received and continue to receive several opportunities for professional development in order to become highly effective within their specific content area. Lead Teacher Support and Training – The school has also hired a Lead Teacher to provide individual professional development for teachers in need. Educational Consultation – Another part of our action plan is utilizing support outside of the school. We employ professional development through our network, achievement coach, TEP coach, Principal Coach and several other channels. Their input provides us with a clear understanding on how to utilize funds, understand new citywide initiatives, staffing decisions, programming, etc. Encouraged off-site Professional Development. Administration and Lead Teacher; consistently send out PD invitations to staff as they become available. Staff are encouraged to attend and when funding allows, administration covers registration, travel, lodging, etc. 8  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development – We have created a school wide professional development schedule. The schedule provides time for the entire staff to meet on a weekly basis. Each week teachers are provided with professional development around three major areas: Danielson’s framework, CCLS (Performance tasks and units of study), and CIE (City-wide instructional expectations). There has been a shift in focus on some occasions, but this is the core structure that supports our goals. We also believe that teacher leadership is imperative to delivering quality professional development. Staff members facilitate most of our professional development sessions. Professional Learning Communities – We believe that collaboration is the key to supporting our school’s goals. Teacher teams, grade teams, department teams, SLT, instructional cabinet, and mentoring teams are essential to our schools growth. Professional Development via the Superintendent's office - We are supported by the superintendent's office with monthly calendar filled with professional development opportunities for staff. Special education, ESL, guidance counselors, para-professional, lead teachers, and new teachers all have the opportunity to obtain training in areas of need. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not applicable. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 9  Not applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. As a school we believe that decisions regarding assessments are made best collaboratively. We have weekly meetings to discuss what assessments are being used for our students and how to administer these assessments to our students. The school’s testing coordinator and data specialist work collaboratively with the heads of each department. Based on their decisions, we then have cabinet meetings to identify what assessments were discussed. We then speak with the school’s U.F.T leader and finalize our decision. We set aside time at the beginning, middle, and end of the school year to provide in depth training around assessments. The training is provided by the school’s lead teacher, testing coordinator, and data specialist. At a grade team level we discuss instructional practices and shifts in practice that needs to take place based on assessment data. 1. Lead Teachers 2. Department heads 3. Co-teachers 4. S.L.T meetings 5. Assessment Team 6. Data Analysis 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal 432622 0 0  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local 14542 3281 $3,528,810 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 1  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Here at EBC we believe that the cornerstone of success academically/socially-emotionally is our relationship with parents and the community. The purpose of this policy is to create a learning environment that is conducive to learning and values the perspective of parents within the school. As a school community we believe that we are in full compliance with various policies regarding parent involvement (Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education (ESSA) Act. We have created several venues to ensure that there is clear, reciprocal communication between parents, students, staff, and administration here at EBC high school. As a school we believe in collaborative decision making at all levels. This includes seeking advice and guidance from our community of parents. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students We have created several entry points for all parents to participate in decision-making (SLT meetings, Academic advisement, PTA/PA meetings, budget meetings with parents, etc.). Listed below are strategies and activities that we have created to support students in need of additional support academically/socially: ● Parent meetings have been scheduled by grade level. These meetings will provide parents and students with additional resources to improve their academic standings. This will take place every semester. ● Students and parents will be provided with academic trackers, credit accumulation calculators that will give them a clear understanding of their present academic standings. ● Provide parents with alternative learning facilities for students in need of these services. ● Our school’s Data Specialist (Ms. Cotto) will provide informative workshops regarding federal and state standards School staff will be provided with professional development sessions dedicated to dealing with students with social-emotional challenges via the guidance team. The program will be facilitated by the guidance department head. 3  ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, CCLS, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Parental Involvement and School Quality Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; 4  ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● hosting events to support, men asserting leadership in education for their children. parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents encouraging other parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand; School-Parent Compact (SPC) EBC High School for Public Service, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. ● Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; 5  ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; ● Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 6  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: ● II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● ● Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 7  ● ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 8  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: After School Academic Support Our Title III program’s primary focus is to provide ENL students with the strategies they need to meet the literacy standards across content areas. Our NYSELAT data indicates that our ENL students need the most support in writing. We are offering content classes taught with differentiated instruction from an ENL perspective using the SIOP principles of building background, providing comprehensible input, student to student discussion, and use of technology. We are offering two sections of ENL support: a Regents- based ELA/ENL enrichment course, and a ENL Support class for students who are Entering and Emerging. Entering and Emerging Support Class:15 students entering and emerging ENL Regents Academy Support Class: 35 Students, Entering and Emerging Students The Entering and Emerging Support class will run for 10 weeks, on Tuesdays and Wednesdays, starting at 2:18 PM and ending at 4:18 PM, beginning Tuesday, October 2nd, 2018. The ENL Regents Academy Support class will run for 10 weeks, on Wednesdays and Thursdays, starting at 2:18 PM and ending at 4:18 PM, beginning Wednesday, October 17th, 2019. Ms. Iglecias and Ms. Hernandez, ENL teachers, will teach the Entering and Emerging. Instruction for this class will be in English and Spanish. They will use the textbook Access: Building Literacy Through Learning, published by HMH Collections, and the LEXIA POWER UP program. Mr. Labbe and Ms. Sanchez-Romero will teach the ENL Regents academy. They will collaborate with ELA teachers in the development of these materials. They will draw heavily from HMS Collections 11th grade edition. Entering and Emerging support 2 teachers X 2 days a week X 2 hours X 10 weeks = 80 hours ENL Regents Academy 2 teachers X 2 days a week X 2 hours X 10 weeks = 80 hours Costs: 160 hours of per session. 2500 dollars OTPS towards LEXIA. Teachers Ms. Iglecias- ENL Certified. Ms. Sanchez-Romero- ENL Certified Mr. Labbe- ENL certified Ms. Hernandez- ENL certified There are 2 classrooms. Students will be grouped based on performance on the NYSESLAT. Ratio of student to teacher will not exceed 20 to 1. 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Teachers take attendance daily and the assistant principal maintains these daily attendance sheets, records and tracks the attendance data. MATERIALS AND COSTS Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our Assistant Principal Mr Engel will work with the ENL department to facilitate collaborative, reflective professional development around the implementation of the QTEL model of instruction, the bilingual common core initiative standards, and best practices for ENL instruction. ENL teachers only: Teachers will meet twice a month for one hour bi-weekly from 3-4pm.. Teachers will meet for 6 sessions beginning on October 29th, 2018. Assistant Principal Engel will maintain sign in sheets and agendas with ENL materials. These sessions will cover the following topics: Tentative Schedule: 10/29/18 Session 1- QTEL Principle 1 Sustaining Academic Rigo 11/12/18 Session 2- QTEL Principle 2 Hold high expectations 12/3/18 Session 3- QTEL principle 3 Engage English Language Learners in Quality Interactions 12/17/18 Session 4- QTEL principle 4: sustain a language focu 2/4/19 Session 5 Evaluating Regents assessment data and make plans for student achievement 5/13/19 Session 14- Plan for professional development for the gened staff. These sessions will be at cost to the program. Only ENL teachers, Iglecias, Sanchez-Romero, Hernandez and Labbe, will participate and be paid per session for this program. . These sessions will be facilitated by Assistant Principal Engel. 6 X 1 hour X 4 staff= 24 per session hours. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration  topics to be covered 1  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: EBC ENL team will conduct 2 separate parent events designed to impact higher achievement for ELL students. Event 1 10/11/18 - Graduation Requirements, ENL Services, and Advanced Academic Achievement for ENL students. Parents will be given detailed information about common core standards, regents exams, and progress to graduation. Parents will be notified by letter, and phone blast in English and Spanish. Provider: EBC teachers and guidance counselors. Event 2 12/8/18- Regents Preparation information. Parents will be given a detailed look at the Regents examinations their students are taking, and information on how to prepare for these examinations. Parents will be notified by letter, and phone blast in English and Spanish. Providers: EBC teachers and guidance counselors. Budget will include 30 hours of per session for 4 teachers, 1 supervisor for the two events. 3 hours each event X 5 staff x 2 events = 30 hours. Budget will also include approximately 300 dollars for food for both events. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials. 2  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 32 School Name EBC High School For Public Service Borough Brooklyn School Number 545 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Shawn Brown Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Kimberly Sanchez-Romero Teacher/Subject Area Hera Yoon/Special Education Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Elaine Acevedo Superintendent Karen Watts Assistant Principal Marc Engel Coach N/A School Counselor Rosaline Rivera Parent Fatima Deluna Parent Coordinator Samary Trinidad Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 4  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 499 Total number of ELLs 110 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 22.04% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. In the fall, all ELLs are given the EDPERFORMANCE assessment. The date is then distributed to all teachers. Teachers then, in turn, use the data to provide individual and group supports. ELL teachers use this data to modify their curriculum and unit plans. Aside from English literacy skills, we use the NYSITELL to evaluate all Spanish-speaking new admits in their native language literacy. 100 percent of new admits identified as eligible for the NYSITELL have been administered the exam and placed appropriately. Also, 100 percent of new ELLs have been administered the NYSITELL in Spanish (they are all Spanish-speaking) and this has been used in conjunction with the ALLD and the parent interview to determine if the students are SIFE. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 5  Our ENL department team meets weekly. A member of the ENL department team is also on the PD committee. Insights cleaned from data analysis inform PD activities for the whole staff. Our ENL PD committee member also collaborates with our data specialist to share pertinent data related to ELLS with the whole staff. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The primary benchmark of success of our program is measured by Regents success rate. However, ENL teachers also collaborate with general education teachers in designing teacher generated midterm and final exams to identify progress and areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? At weekly ENL meetings, the ENL team discusses strategies that can be shared with the whole staff. The ENL team also uses a kid focus protocol where the individual needs of an individual student are discussed. Finally, department team meetings for general education subjects are also used to discuss how to implement interventions for ELLS. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use the EDAT to inform ELL programs. For example we noticed on the NYSESLAT, 10 ninth graders, 11 tenth graders, 3 eleventh graders, and 7 twelfth graders scored low in the writing modality. We also noted that 70 students remained at the same level, and 26 advanced one level. We also noticed that only 3 students passed the ELA regents. 17 students tested out of ELL status in the 16-17 year. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? These findings are discussed in instructional cabinet, professional development committee, ENL team, and department team meetings. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 6  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students are programmed according to their proficiency level as per the NYSESLAT. Presently, Entering students are receiving 675 minutes, Emerging students receiving 450 min, Transitioning students receiving 225 min. , Expanding students are receiving 225 min and Commanding students are 90 min of intergrated ENL. We recently received funding to ensure that our Ells are programmed according to chart 5.2. To be transparent our Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding Students are receiving services in ENL Freestanding classes only. With the additional funding we are going to pay Per Diem to ensure we do the following : Entering : 2 Standalone classes and one ENLELA class, Emerging one Standalone class and one ENLcontent area class, Transitioning one ENLcontent area class and Expanding one ENLcontent area. The content area teachers will be decided as per the needs of the students and availibility of teachers. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered by certified core content teachers, who work in conjunction with certified ENL teachers to meet the instructional needs of our ELLs. Our English Department is working with Core Curriculum Collections this year. The Core Curriculum comes with primary sources, selections of text, high interest library and videos.We use academic word walls, immersion in content vocabulary, Spanish English dictionary, text in native language , Google Translate and ENL teachers are using the SIOP model in their classrooms. ESL Teachers work in conjunction with the content area teacher and apply strategies such as small group instruction, use of technology, create graphic organizers, small group read aloud and vocabulary immersion. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Teachers provide students with copies of exams in native language, as well as any instructional material given throughout the classroom. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Presently our school is using the workshop model, therefore all teachers group students heterogenously based on data provided by the ELL periodic assessment. ENL teachers are practicing the SIOP Model in the classroom. After reviewing data of our ELL subgroups many were placed into ICT classes in other content areas classes. The Special Educators assist in supporting these students with giving small group instructions, multi-level reading material, and technology such as IPADS and laptops. We also offer a Saturday Enrichment class that focuses on Global literacy, we created a dual language class where students work with two teachers receiving reading and writing skills with a focus on Global studies. This was created after reviewing the data 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our ELL-SWD students are place in ICT classes where there are two teachers. The Special Education teachers provide support such as graphic organizers,, technology support and parallel teaching(small-group instruction), IPADs, ST Math Online Program, Google translate, laptops, Computer room, smart board, video lessons. All ELL-SWD students are programmed according to the mandates on their IEP. They receive ENL services in standalone classes currently. In cases where the IEP mandates superceeds ENL mandates and cannot received all of their minutes. Students are placed into our Saturday Global literacy Enrichment class where we have implemented a dual language approach. Only our Entering ELL-SWDs students face this dilema. Students whose IEPs mandates bilingual instruction receives an Alternate Language Placement Paraprofessional. 7  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We have ICT classes, modify curricular as per student data, IEP teachers monitor and send out goal progress report to parents, and all ELLSWD 9 th Grade students are placed in double period English and double period math classes. ELLSWD students are placed in ICT classes as per data attain during a child's annual IEP or Triennual meeting. At the meeting parents are presented with the data collected both form teacher observations, formal and informal assessment as well as parent voice and student's academic and social capbilities. At the meeting CSE team present the options to child's families based on the data. The parent then has 10 days to accept or contest the placement. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 1. Social Studies targeted intervention : Saturday ENL enrichment program focused on Global literacy, Social studies prep classes on Saturdays and after-school by content teachers- EllSWD, SIFE, long Term Ells 2. Science targeted intevention: Prep classes on Saturday and after-school 3. ELA targeted intervention : We have invested in the Core curriculum which high interest classroom libraries, video, and multi-level reading excerpts. AP of English is being trained in AVID (Mr. Henry) and will be turn-keying professional development with ENL and English Department and English Prep classes. 4. Math targeted intervention - ST Math Online program for ELLs, as well as prep classes after-school and small tutoring groups with teachers. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This upcoming year we are considering using Achieve 3000 as a supplementary program to help students improve their reading level. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL students are allowed and encouraged to participate in all programs offered to our whole student population. 1. Saturday Academy- consist of students recovering credits from course they previously failed in the following Science, Math, Global Studies, English, Phyical Education and our Global Literacy Enrichment program that target ourElls who have not yet pass their Global regents exams or will be taking it in their 10 th grade year. The program focuses on building literacy skills in the social studies curriculum. From 9am - 1pm 2. Fashion and Modeling- all students are invited to particpate. Students learn how the fashion industry works and the criteria to be a model 5. Sewing- Students learn how to create clothes by design and create outfits 6. PSAL sports teams- all students are invited to try out for the tems. We have basket ball, Soccer, Baseball, Volley ball, tennis 7. Boxing- on Saturdays from 9 am-12 pm 8. ELLs College Readiness program- depends on funding it focused on assisting Ells and their parents with the college process and allocating funding for college. As well as assisted with additional help with college application and students' personal statement. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Pens, paper, notebooks, iPads, laptops, smartboards, binders, desktops, Chart paper, textbooks, classroom libraries , Spanish English dictionaries, Glossaries, Access to Literacy textbooks in social studies, Science, Math, and ENL with workbooks. Social Studies textbook in native language. 8  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ENL students are encouraged to use home language during class time. We provide Spanish/English dictionaries. We use Google translate. We provide materials in home language and allow students to write responses in home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. After careful review of student transcript, academic progress and teacher observation ELLs are placed according to their grade level and their proficiency level via the NYSELAT. After reviewing the data, students are enrolled in the appropriate support programs. A parent meeting is held to explain the school's decision and we encourage parent input and support. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Pens, paper, notebooks, iPads, laptops, smartboards, binders, desktops, Chart paper, textbooks, classroom libraries , Spanish English dictionaries, Glossaries, Access to Literacy textbooks in social studies, Science, Math, and ENL with workbooks. Social Studies textbook in native language. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All ELL students are encouraged to attend our Summer Bridge Program and are interviewed individually by the School Counselor, Parent Coordinator and Assistant Principal. This year we are enrolling our ELL students into our Summer Enrichment program. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. ELL teachers are sent out to professional development through the Office of English Language Learners. 2. They do intervisitation with schools with large populations of ELLs. EBC High School for Public Service-Bushwick Fall Semester 2015 September 9 : 2a- Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport (Focused Life Skill-Active Listening ) C.C.D Administration Led PD Beginning of the Year Faculty Meeting-Theme: UNITY ☺ September 21: Academy Criteria: Evaluating Criteria and Reflecting on Possible Academic Challenges (SS) Instructional Tool/Strategy: Annotating for Revision (2a/3c) September 27 : School Environment: Developing Department Based Academic Culminating Events (SS) 9  Instructional Tool/Strategy : Student Generated Rubrics (2a/3d) October 5 : 2d- Managing Student Behavior (Focused Life Skill(s)-Active Listening & Experiential Learning) ICT Teams- Co Planning: “Tag-Team” Model (PP/TP) Instructional Tool/Strategy : Establishing Norms and Protocols (2a/2d) Grouping Technique (Random Groups)- Pick a Colored Card October 19 : Spooky Treats “Meet & Eat” (Social Studies) Growth Mindset-Impact on Student Behavior (TP) Instructional Tool/Strategy : Creating Rituals and Routines (2a/2d) and “Funneling (3c/3b) October 26 : (EOM-1) Growth Mindset Continued; Superintend Visit Reflection and Next Steps (TP) Instructional Tool/Strategy : “Funneling” (3/3b) November 2: 3d- Using Assessment in Instruction (Focused Life Skill-Experiential Learning) Assessing With the End in Mind: Pacing Calendar and Unit Planning- Mungioli (PP) Instructional Tool/Strategy: Graphic Organizers (1e/3d) November 9: Evaluation Appropriate Assessment Strategies: ICT Teams- Co Planning for “Tag-Team” Model (PP/TP) Instructional Tool/Strategy: Assigned Grouping Techniques (2d/3d) November 16: Making Vocabulary, Close Reading and Writing KEY in Lesson Development- Labbe (PP) Instructional Tool/Strategy: SIOP Lesson Model (1e/3d) November 23 : Thanksgiving “Meet & Eat” (Whole Staff) Asking the Right Questions- Divergent vs. Convergent Questioning Techniques(PP/A) Instructional Tool/Strategy: Philosophical Chairs (3b/3c) November 30: Creating Meaningful Assessments- Performance Tasks and Performance Based Assessments (PP/A) Instructional Tool/Strategy: Stop and Jot & Peer Feedback (3c/3d) December3 : c-Student Engagement (Focused Life Skill-Study Skills) December 7: (EOM-2) How to Improve Close Reading Skills: Annotating Techniques and Strategies (TP) Instructional Tool/Strategy: TBD December14: Looking at What Works: Examining Teacher Instructional Tools and Strategies to Improve Engagement (TP) Instructional Tool/Strategy: Fishbowl (3c/3dD December 21: Holiday Season “Meet & Eat” (Whole Staff) Addressing the Needs of ELLs and SWDs: ICT Teams- Co Planning for “Tag-Team” Model (PP/TP) Instructional Tool/Strategy: TBD January : a- Demonstrating Knowledge of Content and Pedagogy (Focused Life Skill- Study Skills) January 4: Unit Planning “The Remix”- Identifying high interest and rigorous texts/resources (PP) Instructional Tool/Strategy: TBD January11: New Beginnings “Meet & Eat” (English) Survival Spanish for Teachers: Effective strategies and tools for teaching ELLs (TP) Instructional Tool/Strategy: TBD January 25 : (EOM-3) Performance Tasks and Performance Based Assessments “The Remix”-(PP/A) Instructional Tool/Strategy: TBD Spring Semester 2016 0  February 1 1e- Designing Coherent Instruction (Focused Life Skill- Active Listening) C.C.D Administration Led PD Feb. 22 : Lesson Creation and Evaluation (PP/TP) Instructional Tool/Strategy: TBD Feb 29 :“Meet & Eat” (SPED) Integrating Library Data Bases and SMART technology into curricula Instructional Tool/Strategy: TBD March 7 :2d- Managing Student Behavior (Active Listening/Experiential Learning) ELLs and SPED Student IEPs Up Close: ICT Teams- Co Planning for “Tag-Team” Model (PP/TP) Instructional Tool/Strategy: TBD March 14 : (EOM-1) Growth Mindset-Impact on Teacher Choices and Conduct (TP) Instructional Tool/Strategy: TBD March 21:π Day “Meet & Eat” (Math) Creating Classroom Management Systems (TP) Instructional Tool/Strategy: TBD March18 : Looking at Works: Evaluating Classroom Management in the Spring…(Other Schools) Instructional Tool/Strategy: TBD April 4 : 3c-Questioning and Discussion (Focused Life Skill- Experiential Learning) Asking the Right Questions- How to Get Students to Generate Provocative Questions (PP/A) Instructional Tool/Strategy: Socratic Seminar (3b/3c) April 11 Content Focused Professional Development (PP/TP)- TBD Instructional Tool/Strategy: TBD April 18Spring Fling “Meet & Eat” (Arts, Spanish, Library and Computer Sciences) Incorporating the Arts Across Curricula Instructional Tool/Strategy: May 2: 3d- Using Assessment in Instruction (Focused Life Skill- Study Skills) 2 (EOM-2) Looking Ahead: Pacing Calendar and Unit Planning for 2016/2017- (PP) Instructional Tool/Strategy: TBD May 9: Tweaking Assessments- Performance Tasks and Performance Based Assessment Revisions (PP/A) Instructional Tool/Strategy: TBD May 16:“Meet & Eat” (Science and Physical Education) Have We Effectively Address the Needs of ELLs and SWDs: ICT Teams- Co Planning (PP/TP) Instructional Tool/Strategy: TBD May23 : Academies: Evaluating Success and Challenges. Making Next Steps (SS) Instructional Tool/Strategy: TBD June 9: 1e- Designing Coherent Instruction ( Focused Life Skill-Study Skills) C.C.D Administration Led PD 1  June 13 : (EOM-3) N/A *C.C.D.- Chancellor’s Conference Day PP-Planning and Preparation TP-Teacher Practice A-Assessment SS-School Systems Teachers will be receiving PD on the SIOP model during Inquiry team meetings. During Inquiry meeting all teachers will be working on revisiting Units and lessons and re-aligning them to CCS. Inquiry meeting time will be spent on peer intervisitation of classrooms and teachers will give feedback to each other, based on their observations. Teachers will give each other feedback in developing rigorous and engaging instructions with a focus on provocative questioning and extended writing. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We have our Summer Bridge Program for our incoming students. Teachers attend Professional Development through the Office of English Language Learners . Both ENL teachers will have the opportunity to attend at least one PD a month based on instructional practice. After attending the PD , teachers will fill out the Professional Development form (OP2O1) to the school Secretary Ms. Serrano along with an Agenda from the meeting. The documents will be palced in teacher's file which is kept in a lock cabinet in the main office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Through our Title III Saturday Enrichment programs, we have scheduled three meetings with parents to discuss curriculum and ELL students' progress with language development. In addition, at each PA meeting we discuss the progress of our ELL population regarding graduation rate and Regents pass rates. Our Parent coordinator Ms. Samary Trinidad serves as our translator for all meetings. She is bilingual in parent native language. In addition, Ms. Luciano a certified Social Studies whos is bilingual in parent native language conducts the meeting on curriculum. Parent Coordinator Ms. Trinidad and Mr. Henry meets with parents individually , starting in July with the parent of our incoming Ells and we continue to meet parents in September. All parents sign in a log book and records are kept in the Parent Coordinator's office in a lock cabinet. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All ELL parents are invited to computer literacy classes, PA meetings, and are encouraged to have individual meetings scheduled by our Parent Coordinator. Our computer classes are focused on teaching parents how to access school related websites such as School.net, and DOE website for resources. They are taught how to create email accounts, visit college websites and review financial aid for college. Ms. luciano ( Bilingual in native language) conducts the classes with the computer teacher. The Parent Coordinator contacts parents about classes, makes one on one phone calls, sends out flyers for the program and welcomes the parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2  3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Shawn Brown, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Shawn Brown Title Principal Gerard Henry Assistant Principal Trinidad Samary Parent Coordinator Claxite Labbe ENL/Bilingual Teacher Fatima Deluna Parent Ana Garcia Teacher/Subject Area Darnese Olivieri Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Rosaline Rivera School Counselor Karen Watts Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 32k545 School Name: EBC High School Superintendent: Karen Watts The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Home language survey and emergency blue cards are used to assess our school's written translation and oral interpretation needs. Parents of new students and entering 9th grade students are interviewed in their native language or through translation of the native language. All of our incoming students this year have indicated English or Spanish as their preferred language. This has been entered on the BIOS screen at admission and communication is done in the preferred language. The school population as a whole consists of 60.5% Spanish, 38.7% English, and less than one percent Hatian Creole and Indonesian(1 student each). All of the parents of these students speak English fluently, as indicated in the parent interviews done at admission. However, correspondence with these parents is also available in their native languages. 6  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language English and Spanish 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Bi-monthly Parent Newsletter Bi-monthly School Calendar Medicaid Consent Letters Military Opt-out Letters Promotion In Doubt Letters Summer Letters Parent Teacher Conference Notices(goes out with the bi-monthly newsletter) Parent Association Notices Regents Schedule(goes out with the bi-monthly newsletter) English Language Learner Entitlement Letters 7  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 9/30- Family Night 11/19- Parent Teacher Evening Conference 11/20- Parent Teacher Afternoon Conference 3/10- Parent Teacher Evening Conference 3/11- Parent Teacher Afternoon Conference 5/10- Evening Conference Attendance Calls are made on a daily basis by the Attendance office pertaining to lateness and absenteeism Autodialer is used for all events that are taking place in the school in parent's preferred language School counselors make phone calls as needed to students needing academic and social-emotional progress 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 8  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) a. Information regarding parents in need or translation and oral interpretation assistance is maintained in ATS and on the student emergency cards. b. All monolingual (English-speaking) school staff are required to have a translator for interactions with parents whose dominant language is not English; this can be done in-house or via the translation phone number. c. Written translation for documents in mailed and/or backpacked home. d. Oral translation at all school-related functions and at Open School night and afternoon Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Coordinator will conduct a parent survey with parents at the PA meetings at the beginning, middle and end of the school year. Parents will be surveyed at the Fall and Spring Parent Teacher Conferences. All surveys will be anonymous. 9 
