 17K547 School Name: BROOKLYN ACADEMY OF SCIENCE AND THE ENVIRONMENT Principal: GAIL LAMBERT   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Brooklyn Academy of Science and the Environment 331700011547 9-12 School Number (DBN): 17k547 883 Classon Avenue, Brooklyn, New York, 11225 718 230-6363 Phone Number: 718 230-6370 Fax: Juanita Fraser JFraser2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Gail Lambert Latoya Lebby Nadine Benjamin CarenCleckley SelsoK. DaSilva MaabKalefa NimotaSurakat Barbara Kurland District Information Geographical District: 17 Richard Citron Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Brooklyn, New York 11201 Superintendent’s Office Address: rcitron@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 923-5124 Phone Number: 718 923-5145 Fax:   Field Support Center (FSC) Affinity Group Field Support Center FSC: Alexandra Annormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 935-5618 Phone Number: 718 935-5941 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Gail Lambert Latoya Lebby Nadine Benjamin Grecia Noel SelsoK DaSilva Maab Kalefa Nimota Surkurat Barbara Kurland CarenCleckley Michael Klingler Joyce Vincent *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ teacher Member/Teacher Member/Parent   TBA TBA Elizabeth Otte N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Teacher CBORepresentative Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission: BASE is a three-campus New York City Public High School that integrates the missions and resources of Prospect Park and the Brooklyn Botanic Garden to offer academic excellence and rigor. Our community of staff, families and community partners supports students in becoming critical thinkers, active learners and problem solvers who are scientifically literate, engaged citizens who value and respect the environment.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. In 2002, the Brooklyn Botanic Garden (BBG) and the Prospect Park Alliance (PPA) had been challenged to bring their considerable resources to bear to help improve public education in central Brooklyn. BBG and PPA began a rigorous process that culminated with the Brooklyn Academy of Science and the Environment (BASE) being selected as one of eight applicants out of sixty in Brooklyn to be part of the citywide New Century High School initiative to convert large under-performing high schools into clusters of small themed schools. The New Century High School initiative is funded by the Carnegie Foundation, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, and the Open Society Institute; it is administered by New Visions for Public Schools in collaboration with the New York City Department of Education (DOE). BASE is the first public high school in Brooklyn that weaves connections between academic subjects and the environment. At BASE, learning moves beyond the classroom walls. Field Studies is a unique credit-bearing science course that teaches students scientific inquiry through real-world learning. All ninth grade students have the privilege of using Prospect Park and BBG as “classrooms” to complement their Living Environment course. Students are devoted to studying different ecosystems in Prospect Park and the Brooklyn Botanic Garden; they focus on learning to design and implement a controlled experiment. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Students are heterogeneously grouped with special attention given to accommodating students with disabilities and English language learners. Credit accumulation for our students with disabilities continues to significantly lag behind their general education counterparts. School year 2016-17 only 58% of students with disabilities earned credits in mathematics. School year 2017-18 there was a 6% decrease of students with disabilities passing their math classes. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The 2017 - 2018 School Quality Guide indicates that Effect School Leadership (Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement) made the most progress. Last year Effective School Leadership score was 2.44. This year Effective School Leadership score is 3.41 almost a 1% increase. Our instructional focus for the past three years are listed below: 2015-2016: Argument essay writing 2016-2017: Engaging Students in Learning/Designing Coherent Instruction 2017 - 2018: Using Assessment in Instruction In the 2018-2019 school year, our instructional focus: Danielson's 3b: Insist that students use evidence to make claim through whole class discussion and /or writing. 0  Elements in which the school made progress: According to the NYC School Survey Report for 2017-2018, We have made significant gains in 5 out of 6 areas of the elements of the Framework for Great Schools: Collaborative Teaching from 3.09 to 3.22. Supportive Environment from 2.61 to 3.16 Effective School Leadership from 2.44 to 3.41 Strong Family-Community Ties from 3.15 to 3.17. Trust from 3.09 to 3.56. Key areas of focus: Rigorous instruction was our lowest scoring element in the Framework for Great Schools last year. We decreased from 3.85 to 3.09 last year. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 17K547 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 373 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 16 4 8 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 14 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 81.0% % Attendance Rate 77.7% % Reduced Lunch 5.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.8% 9.4% 2.9% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.25 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 81% 60% 68.0% 5.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 95 94 89.4% 3.2% 16.6% 81.0% 5.1% 1.6% 6 37% 5.8 N/A N/A 77% 81% 87.1% 21% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  The 2017-2018 Learning Environment survey indicated that we had 94% positive responses on questions related to Common Core Literacy shifts and 87% positive responses on questions related to Common Core Math.  To ensure college and career readiness, BASE students are afforded the opportunity to take Advanced Placement courses in Biology, US History, Computer Science, English Composition and Calculus in the 2017-2018 school year. This school year two more Advanced Placement classes has been added English Literature and Art History. BASE has also developed a partnership with Long Island University Brooklyn Campus, where 27 students took college courses. Students also applied, attend information sessions and workshops to SEO Scholars, Mind Matters, and Long Island University courses.  We have implemented college-readiness instructional strategies across all content areas through extensive professional development. School-wide implementation of these strategies promotes college readiness and supports intellectual engagement for all students.  Argument, text based, and content specific essay writing tasks have been designed and implemented across all content areas (with the exception of Math and LOTE). Students also write mandatory research papers in their ELA classes. 9th graders write 1-2 page papers, 10th graders write 3-5 pages, 11th graders write 5-7 pages, and 12th graders must write a 10-page paper in order to graduate.  o Reading - We continue to implement close reading as a learning tool including the use of annotation across content areas. 3   We have the staffing necessary to support students with diverse needs. We have four teachers who are certified special educators, two of whom are dual-certified in various content areas. Our English as a New Language (ENL) teacher co-teaches a writing class with an English Language Arts teacher. We place a strong emphasis on hiring dual-certified teachers whenever possible.  We have an active professional development team who meets regularly to plan PD. We distribute and analyze a professional development needs assessment aligned to our instructional focus. We gauge our progress with a mid-year PD evaluation survey. Our priority needs: Rigorous Instruction in the past was our highest scoring element in the Framework for Great Schools. In the 2017-2018, this element is our lowest (3.09 out of 4) The discussion portion of Rigorous Instruction section of the NYC School Survey indicated that 60% teachers stated, "That the students will use data or text references to support their ideas." Based on the School Quality Guide, our overall Quality of students discussion was below the Borough and City Average. On the Quality Review we received a developing in Pedagogy 1.2, on how effective is the teaching and learning? The reviewer stated, "Student tasks were inconsistently designed to allow for student collaboration. As such, student engagement and participation was limited and at uneven levels across the majority of the classrooms." Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 the percentage of graduates receiving an Advance Regents Diploma will increase by 3 % 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? We will expand our course offering to include Chemistry in the 2018 - 19 school year Teachers Sept 5, 2018- Administration Teachers we will administer cumulative interim exams three times per year to assess student progress and adjust instruction to meet the needs of diverse learners. Teachers will analyze the data from interims using the Gradecam analysis tool. The interims will be analyzed by the administration to ensure Common Core alignment. Teachers After analyzing the data, teachers will create action plans in order to identify sub-groups of students and provide targeted instructional support to address skill gaps. They submit these reports to the principal. Our LOTE Teacher will teacher a 6 period coverage so more students are able to take the LOTE Exam. Teachers Administration June 14, 2019 November 13 - 21, 2018 January 8 - 15, 2019 April 8 - 16, 2019 Administration September 5, - June 2019 We will offer learning center after to offer additional academic support Administration November 20, 2018 - Teachers June 13, 2019 Teachers will participate in inter visitations to provide collegial feedback and strengthen teachers practice Teachers November 2018 Self guided by teachers Questions and discussion techique will be our instuctional forcus for the school year which will inform our professional development Teachers February 2019 October 3, 2018 School Community 5 We plan to increase Advanced Placement student enrollment by offering seven AP Courses including AP Calculus. Teacher We will offer SAT preparatory classes on Mondays after-school. Teachers AP For All Administration September 5, 2018 - June 22, 2019 Every Monday beginning October 15, 2018 - December 22, 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the October 23, 2018 Parent Association meeting and Open School night parents will be informed and given the discussion protocol and the criterion for an Advance Regents Diploma so that they can support their child at home. Parents will be notified of learning center opportunities via mail and phone messages. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Learning center will be paid Title I funding. Sixth period coverage will be paid from Fair Student Funding Discussion protocol will be displayed in every classroom. Funds will be used to pay for classroom posters. 6  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, students on track for Advanced Regent Diploma will score at least a 65 or higher on their January interim exam in Chemistry and LOTE. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Interim Exams aligned to Regents in Chemistry and LOTE. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Supportive Environment Strengths: BASE has two licensed school counselors who allow students to freely express their academic and personal concerns with the goal of facilitating human growth and development. Each counselor follows the caseload from ninth grade through graduation providing students the stability needed as they transition from youth to adulthood. Students are referred, scheduled, and/or they walk in. Counselors hold individual and group sessions. They provide student/student, teacher/student, and parent conferences as well as group guidance sessions in the classrooms. The counselors focus on developing students’ leadership, communication, time management, and decision making skills so that they are college ready when they leave high school. BASE has Margaret’s Place, a safe haven for students, sponsored by the Joe Torre Foundation. Margaret's Place supports students' social emotional growth. It develops peer leaders who educate students on topics that include domestic violence, bullying, and being able to identify healthy relationships. BASE has a full-time dean whose focus is to support a safer environment throughout the day. The dean provides staff support with disciplinary issues and works directly with the school counselors to provide redirection and mediation. BASE has a partnership with the Brooklyn Botanic Garden (BBG). A liaison who provides internship and extracurricular opportunities to students has office hours at BASE. All BASE families and staff have membership to the Garden. The Field Studies and Earth Science classes use BBG as a hands-on learning site. ENL (English as a New Language) students are scheduled for a co-teaching in designated Global Studies and Algebra classes; last year the teacher only assisted in an English class. The ENL teacher assists in the development of skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing the English language using a content-based approach. In addition, most teachers and staff found opportunities to establish a rapport with students during non-teaching periods. Teachers 8  provided extra help with work and/or a safe space in their classrooms. Other staff members lent an ear to students which fostered a family-type relationship of caring. BASE continued with Restorative Circles which was implemented in grade 9 during the 2015-2016 school year. Priority need(s): The mission of the BASE community is to support students in becoming critical thinkers, active learners and problem solvers who are scientifically literate, engaged citizens who value and respect the environment. The 2017-2018 School Survey, however, indicated that only 56% of students feel that they follow the rules in class. It also indicated a score of 3.16 in Supportive Environment. There is a need at BASE to create a more positive school climate by providing clear, concise procedures and increased, structured extracurricular activities that support learning and positive youth development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the suspension will decrease from 88 to 83 which is a 5 % decrease compared to last year. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Staff, students and families will receive a revised cell phone/electronics policy using Yondr pouches. The staff will be informed of the ladder of referral during the first faculty meeting. All students and staff September 4, 2018 Teachers, Support Staff, and Administration Extracurricular activities will be strategically publicized via 3rd period announcements and emails to increase sustained student participation. Such activities will include, but are not limited to, community service activities (Cancer Walk, AIDS Walk, Pennies for Patients), internships (provided by BASE’s partner liaison at BBG), Junior Achievement (High School Heroes, job shadows), and school service activities (assistance in offices and during Open School). Student achievements will be celebrated on a designated bulletin board and will be updated each marking period. Recognition will include, but will not be limited to, attendance, scholarship, improvement, service, and/or special accomplishments. Announcements of such recognition will made in the 3rd period announcements, via Phone Messenger to families, and by invitation to such events as the NHS induction ceremony. Staff recognition will take place in weekly acknowledgments via email. All students September AP Administration 5, 2018- June 26, 2019 Administration Eligible students and staff based on criteria of the activity October 22, 2018 December 4, 2018 January 23, 2019 March 18, 2019 May 6, 2019 June 19, 2019 BASE will continue to collaborate with the 100 Schools Project to provide mental health and substance abuse support. 100 schools will provide a workshop on depression. BASE will adopt a College Going Culture. Activities will include, but are not limited to the following: Parent Association December 20, 2018 AP Administration All Students 1.) Oct. 22-AP Administration 26 2018 0 1) College week: CUNY representatives are sent to help seniors with their college applications. Students are invited to interview staff and family members regarding their college experiences, 2) SAT vocabulary will be posted on a designated bulletin board/hall monitor 3) Students will participate in college courses at Medgar Evers College and Long Island University 4) Senior college acceptances will be posted on a designated bulletin board in the spring 5) A Career Day will take place in the spring 6) College Tours: Students visit local and out-of-state colleges. 2.) Feb. 25 2019-Mar.26, 2019 3.) Sept. 5 Dec. 21 2018 4.) May 1, 2019 5.) May 8, 2019 6.) October 31-November 1, 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. Parents will have access to Jupiter Grades and the Remind application to receive current reports on student progress. 2. Academic and school information will be shared on Back to School Night in September and at monthly PA Meetings. 3. Parents of seniors will participate in college application and FAFSA meetings. 4. The National Honor Society induction ceremony will take place during a PA Meeting in the spring. 5. Parents will be invited as speakers on Career Day. 6. Parents will be invited to sit in classrooms during the school day. 7. Parents will be invited to a workshop to support social-emotional growth at home as well as in school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. No additional funding outside of staff salaries will be needed to implement this plan. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 1  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, the number of suspension will decrease from 49 to 46 which is a decreased of 3% compared to January 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS OYD Portal reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Collaborative Teachers Strengths: On the 2017-2018 Learning Environment survey under "Collaborative Teachers", we reported the following statistics: 91% of teachers say that teachers are actively trying to improve their teaching (6% higher than city average) 86% of teachers say that their professional development experiences this year have been sustained and coherent. (7% higher than city average) 91% of teachers say that they usually look forward to each working day at their school (6% higher than city average) Priority needs: Increase staff collaboration through the use of grade teams which will address credit accumulation needs. Questions on the Learning Environment survey related to Peer Collaboration were 6% below city average. The survey reported that, "76% of teachers say that at their school the principal, teachers and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively" which was 8% below city average. Our school-wide credit accumulation decreased from 80.96% ( 2016-2017) to 78.89% (2017-2018). We did not meet last year's CEP goal of 82%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our credit accumulation will increase 2% from 78.89% to 80.89% as indicated on school scholarship reports. 3  4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Our professional development committee comprised of at least six members will meet regularly to plan professional development. Members will include special educators so that professional development meets the needs of our diverse population. We will continue utilizing the Professional Learning Communities (PLC) model of professional development. The PLCs will focus on improving class discussion. The PLCs will encourage teacher collaboration, teacher choice, and teacher leadership. In addition, Wednesday professional development time will include opportunities for teachers to collaborate in content-area teams to engage in inquiry to meet student needs. The principal will oversee the PD team. The AP of Supervision will facilitate the meetings. Teachers Oct. 2018 Nov.2018 Jan. 2019 Mar.2019 May 2019 June 2019 Teachers Increase the number of grade team meetings to coordinate grade-level and school events, supports, parent outreach, and expectations. Grade teams will meet on most Wednesday afternoons rather than once per month. The teams will be comprised of teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors and administrators. Our two guidance counselors stay with their students throughout the four years and will also rotate between their two grade teams. Sept. 5, 2018 -June 5, 2019 (4x per six week marking period) Teacher leaders will facilitate grade team meetings. School administrators will support the grade team leaders as outlined below. 5  Strengthen support for grade team leaders. The grade team leaders will participate in two planning and support meetings per month. One meeting with include all grade team leaders,administrators, dean, Coordinator of Student Activities (COSA) and guidance counselors. One meeting per month will include more individualized support for the grade team leader including their respective guidance counselor and an administrator. Expand Circular 6 opportunities to include common planning, technology, study hall room, ENL testing, and sustainability coordinator. Most teachers will have common planning time embedded into their schedule so they can collaborate in designing, implementing, and assessing lesson tasks that are intellectually engaging and meet the needs of diverse learners. Teachers will be encouraged to engage in inter-visitations to offer collegial feedback and support. We will strengthen co-teaching partnerships through professional development led by our Special Education Improvement Specialist (SESIS) for all teachers and paraprofessionals. In addition, our specialist will work closely with three teams (including general education, special education, and paraprofessionals) to foster collaboration and design Specially Designed Instruction (SDI) to address student needs. Grade teams Teachers School administrators Principal Monthly beginning on September 12, 2018 Daily beginning on September 5, 2018 Teachers and paraprofessionals 2x a month starting on September 25, 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School staff will collaborate to lead workshops for families on Back to School night on September 26th. Topics include: Jupitergrades, AP for All, School Culture, and Title I funding. Our parent coordinator is responsible for this event including individual phone calls and mailings to our Back to School night. These workshops will help families understand our expectations and what they can do at home to support their child. Teachers will collaborate during grade team meetings four times per marking period during parent engagement time. The grade team functions to support parent outreach efforts which includes preparing for Back to School Night, collaborating to incentivize parents to use Jupitergrades, and coordinating targeted parental outreach. An administrator or dean will serve on each team and be responsible for one grade team. 6  Progress reports will be mailed to families in the middle of every marking period. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. No additional funding outside of staff salaries will be needed to implement this plan. Common planning will be embedded into the master schedule. Our PD time will be used on Wednesday afternoons per our approved School Based Option (SBO). PD team meetings will occur during teacher time on Wednesday afternoons. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, our schoolwide credit accumulation will be 79%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use STARS scholarship reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: The 2017-2018 New York City School Survey showed a significant increase in questions related to Effective School Leadership. It went from 2.44 to 3.41 100% of core content are teachers are using student work to inform their instruction practice through inquiry in department teams and through an analysis of interim exams. Priority needs Increase our graduation rate. Last year, our graduation rate was 62%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our graduation rate will increase 5% from 62% to 67% 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? We offer targeted Learning Center to students after school three times per week on Mondays, Tuesdays and Thursdays. We will also hold multiple Super Saturdays to provide additional support from 10am-1pm.We will offer PM school to address credit gaps. Teachers Revise our Super Wednesday event to include more students. Once per marking period, each period will have an additional eight instructional minutes. On Super Wednesday, time in class will be allotted for case conferencing with teachers and make-up work. We will also hold clubs and activities from 1:40pm-3:00pm on that day. Students Principal, AP Organization Principal PM School: October 9, - January 19, Mon, Tues, Thurs and Sat. Super Saturdays: Jan 5 - 19 2019 Super Wednesday: Oct 10, NOv 3, Jan 9, Feb 27, Mar 27, Apr 10, and My 29 We will administer cumulative interim exams four times per year to assess student progress and adjust instruction to meet the needs of diverse learners. Teachers will analyze the data from interims using the GradeCam analysis tool. The interims will be analyzed by school administrators to ensure Common Core alignment. After analyzing the data, teachers will create action plans in order to identify sub-groups of students and provide targeted instructional support to address skill gaps. School administrators will hold data meetings with teachers based on the results of their interim analyses in order to discuss their action plans to meet the needs of students. We will switch from students earning credits on an annual basis to students earning credits by semester. After each marking period, teachers will receive their scholarship data reports. Administrators will hold individual meetings with teachers who have below 70% pass rates. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers Nov 13 - 20 Administrators Jan 8 - 15 Apr 8 - 16 Teachers Sept 5 - Jan 28 Principal Jan 29 - Jun 26 9  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Phone messages and flyers are used to communicate Super Wednesday, Super Saturday and Learning Center supports. Grade teams invite parents to participate in conferences during parent engagement times. The grade team functions to support parent outreach efforts. We will mail home report cards and progress reports in the middle of the marking period. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Wednesday grade team meetings and Super Wednesdays will occur monthly during the school-day which is paid for by teachers' salaries. Learning Center and Super Saturdays will be provided in collaboration with the High School for Global Citizenship. They will use their 21st Century Grant. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, our school-wide credit accumulation will be 80% based on third marking period data generated from STARS. We will generate the scholarship reports of teachers after each marking period. January 2019 will be our mid-point benchmark and we will discuss the results in our School Committee. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Credit accumulation data from STARS after each marking period. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  BASE is partnered with Brooklyn Botanic Garden (BBG.) New families are welcomed by both the school and the Garden for the New Family Orientation at BBG. All families receive free memberships to BBG. A liaison from BBG sits on the SLT along with parents, staff and students.  BASE has two guidance counselors. Each guidance counselor follows a class from freshmen orientation through graduation. Parents engage with their children's guidance counselor for individual in-person conferences and/or phone/email communications as well as by attending interactive workshops around college readiness. These workshops include topics such as transcript review and FAFSA assistance.  The 9th grade teacher team signs all 9th grade parents up for the app called Remind. Parents and teachers communicate via text regarding the progress of the child and current assignments that the parents should ensure the child is completing.  BASE parents are encouraged to sign into Jupiter Grades in order to keep track of their children's academic progress. Through Jupiter Grades, they are able to communicate with the teachers via email.  The school communicates with parents using Phone Messenger.  All Advanced Placement parents are invited to a mandatory parent workshop so that parents can partner with the school to support their children's success on AP exams.  Parents are invited to attend intervention meetings for students who are falling behind academically and/or falling below a college readiness attendance rate.  Parents attend disciplinary and/or mediation regarding their children as needed.  In the 2017 - 2018 school year, the Parent Association increased the opportunities available to parents. Computer Literacy workshops were offered after school and a Spanish class on Saturdays. Special speakers related to immigration, social services and more were invited to speak at the monthly meetings. Priority need is to increase parent outreach:  Increase the number of families that says they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the percentage of families that say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom will increase from 78% to 80% on the NYC school survey. 1  2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? BASE will leverage its partnership with BBG by engaging parents in their children's community service activities to meet the school's 100 hour community service requirement. Garden Crew participants and their parents. BASE Family Festival October 27, 2018 BBG Partnership Liaison will lead in the implementation of the activities. Historically BASE students participate in BBG's Garden Crew Program. Students plant, harvest, and cook vegetables from the Children's Garden at BBG. They also provide a harvest twice a year that feeds the entire Prospect Heights Campus. Students who participate in the Annual Fall Festival with their parents will receive community service credit. Garden Crew students will engage all BASE families in their harvesting activities on this day. Garden Crew recruitment will begin in mid-September.. Monthly worksheets/calendar containing activities students and families can do together. Parents Monthly breakfast with the principal event will culminate in classroom visits. Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement SLT Committee Principal Oct 25, Jan 24, Feb 28, Mar 28, May 23 Oct 10, Nov 14, Dec 12, Jan 9 If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Brooklyn Botanic Garden Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 3  BASE will leverage its partnership with Brooklyn Botanic Garden in order to strengthen its partnership with parents. BASE Parent Association will use their funds to offer workshops and metrocards. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, parents who complete the Google form survey will state they had an opportunity to attend at least 1 classroom visit and two school wide event with their child. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Google form survey for parents which will be emailed to them Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 8 th grade ELA score, Regents score, IEP recommendation 8 th grade Math score and pre-assessment, IEP recommendation, Regents scores Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Intervention writing class, Co-teaching, After school tutoring and Saturday Regent prep. Extra period of math, co-teaching, after school tutoring and Saturday Regents prep IEP recommendation, Regents score, 2 nd year of Living Environment IEP recommendation, Regents score Co-teaching, after school tutoring, Saturday Regents prep and peer tutoring. Co-teaching, after school tutoring, Saturday Regents prep and peer tutoring. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Small group/individual counseling with social worker from Margaret’s Place Joe Torre Safe at Home Foundation- Margaret’s Place counseling Mandated counseling Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one-to-one tutoring During the day, after school and Saturday In class instruction, co-teaching, one-to-one tutoring, peer tutoring, after school tutoring and Saturday Regents Prep. Co-teaching, after school tutoring, peer tutoring, after school tutoring, and Saturday Regents prep. Co-teaching, after school tutoring, peer tutoring, after school tutoring, and Saturday Regents prep. One-to-one and small group counseling During the day, after school and Saturday During the day, after school and Saturday During the day, after school and Saturday During the day 5  Mandated counseling with guidance counselor Counseling as needed. 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 27 students We will assist these students with uniforms, notebooks, pens, pencils, and counseling services through Margret's Place and the guidance counselors. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 1. We post our vacancies through the New Visions network in addition to normal DOE channels. This generates large numbers of applicants, which gives us a better pool of applicants. 2. We have a well-established system for hiring new staff. The process is run by committee (although the principal has the final say.) The collaborative and deep nature of this process allows us to confidently choose the best and most qualified staff members for open positions. 3. Our hiring committee considers only highly qualified applicants except in rare cases where such an applicant has not applied. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  The Principal will be attending ELI and College for All workshops  All AP teachers will attend AP for All workshops.   Lead teacher attends common core professional development through New Visions and turnkeys what they have learned during job embedded professional development time. Students have a half day on Wednesdays and the remainder of the time is devoted to professional development and grade team meetings. In addition to Wednesdays, some staff members devote their C-6 time to common planning.   The Special Education teachers will received PD on Specially Designed Instruction (SDI) and (ICT) co-teaching models. Teachers, students and paraprofessionals will received PD on strengthening/building partnerships. The purpose of building and strengthening partnerships is to provide an engaging learning environment for All.  The school is using New Vision common core curriculum math units.  English Language Arts teachers have common planning time to develop CCSS aligned curriculum units. The ELA lead teacher had been our CCSS liaison with New Visions for the past two years. He delivers professional development to his department members.  Paraprofessionals participate in all professional development activities. 9  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are able to design their interim assessments at the department level. At the classroom level, teachers select and design their assessment measures. Teachers are required to conduct interim assessment analysis and error coding. Data obtained from this process is used to inform instruction. They write instructional plans to address students’ needs. Professional development is offered to the teachers. Instructional decisions are data-driven. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 0  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5C, 5E N/A 5C N/A 5B, 5C, 5D Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 263920.00 0 3532.00 0 2512093.00 X N/A X N/A X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 1   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. BASE PARENT INVOLVEMENT POLICY Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 17K547, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 17K547 will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 3   providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association and Title I Parent Sub-Committee of the PA.. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, New York State's ESSA accountability system, student proficiency levels, NYS Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, NYC School Survey; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 4  ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Sub-Committee; ● partnering with Brooklyn Botanic Garden to promote meaningful parental involvement; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● maintaining the BASE Website designed to keep parents informed about school activities and important information; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand; using Jupiter Ed to communicate student progress and to promote 2-way communication between parents and teachers. 17K547 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children. This includes: training on how to become effective parent leaders, Title I Parent subcommittee and SLT training. ● Providing opportunities for guidance counselors to partner with parents for them to understand college and career readiness, graduation requirements, and transcript interpretation so that they could monitor their children's progress. ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● Partnering with parents of ENLs and of who immigrated from other countries to provide professional development for school staff who teach and interact with their children on a daily basis. The goal is to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency that will build stronger ties with students and their parents. ; We will use the Home Language Survey data to invite parents who speak a different language at home to engage in a dialogue with school staff about their culture in order to make the staff aware of how best to communicate with them and their children. All other parents will be invited to this forum as well. 5  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. BASE School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) 17K547, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; 6  ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 7  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 8  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 17 School Name Brooklyn Academy of Science and the Envi Borough Brooklyn School Number 547 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Gail Lambert Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Melisande Barclay/ENL/Spanish Teacher/Subject Area Karen Evans/ELA Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Donald Conyers Assistant Principal Diana Boyer Coach N/A School Counselor N/A Parent Ann Marie Coutou Parent Coordinator N/A Field Support Center Staff Member Sam Rodriguez Other (Name and Title) type N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification N/A Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 395 0 Total number of ELLs 25 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.33%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In the early fall, the ENL teacher administers a teacher-created baseline assessment. This assessment is aligned to the Common Core standards. The assessment is a personal narrative that focuses on descriptive writing and requires students to read and understand the instructions in order to elaborate on their answers, provide specific supporting details, use appropriate language and follow the standard conventions of writing English. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ELA teacher creates this exam with the input of the ENL teacher. They administer this assessment in their co-taught writing class. 1  Unit plans are submitted to school administration for review. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? All teachers administer interim assessments throughout the year (November, January, April) which are cumulative and the results reflect their progress in meeting all standards to date. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Each teacher analyzes the interim results and completes a Data analysis/Error coding report. This includes identifying sub-groups of students (such as ELLS) with their unmet standards. Teachers create an action plan detailing how those students' needs will be addressed. This is reviewed by the principal. Teachers are also given a PD needs assessment at the beginning of the year and a mid-year PD evaluation in order to inform our professional development plan so that it's responsive to student and staff needs. The results of which are shared with the PD team and adjustments to our PD plan are made accordingly. We offer PM school to address credit gaps and provide extra support for those students who still need to pass the Regents exams. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not applicable. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data from the ELA Regents, NYSESLAT and NYSITELL were low in writing overall. Students need to work on writing skills to develop their ideas fully. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We use the New Visions data sorter. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Since we do not have any Entering or Emerging students, we currently offer one 220+ minute co-taught writing course ( with one certified ENL teacher and one certified ELA teacher) with a heterogeneous mix ( Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding) of students. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A 2  c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Since we do not have any Entering or Emerging students, we currently offer one 220+ minute co-taught writing course (one certified ENL teacher and one certified ELA teacher) with a heterogeneous mix ( Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding) of students. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The co-taught ENL writing course covers writing across the content areas. Students are encouraged to write about their own lives through narrative writing which provides an entry point into more formal writing. Teachers use the TIED paragraph structure (Topic Sentence, Introduce Evidence, Evidence, Discuss Evidence) to support coherence across the content areas. Teachers encourage annotation as a close reading strategy. Students use Google Classroom to collaborate with the teachers and other students in the class. Scaffolds such as model written assignments, peer review and peer editing, use of video scaffolds, drafting and redrafting of writing for both content and conventions. Vocabulary review, transition word lists and review. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Teachers are given a spreadsheet with ELLS, their home language and levels and given links to content-specific glossaries in their home language made available by New York State. The testing coordinator orders Regents in multiple languages based on our current ELL population. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students- More pictures to build prior knowledge and relate to daily experiences. b. Newcomer- Visual scaffolds. c. Developing- Short paragraphs, oral presentations, more concrete examples. d. Long term- Usually they are advanced, work on content-based instruction to motivate. e. Former ELLs- Group with students with similar needs. Align the CCLS or Regents. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Close reading, socratic seminar, Collections ELA curriculum, guided notes, Cornell notes, annotation, graphic organizers, Engage NY. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 3  We offer primarily ICT classes. Teachers have common planning embedded in their schedule to collaborate to meet student needs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Learning center is after-school remediation from 3:30pm-5pm on Tuesdays and Thursdays. It is offered for all of the core content areas. We also offer monthly remediation for about 2 hours on Wednesday afternoons. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Not applicable. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Learning center is after-school remediation from 3:30pm-5pm on Tuesdays and Thursdays. It is offered for all of the core content areas. We also offer once per month remediation for about 2 hours on Wednesday afternoons. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLS have access to Ipads, netbooks, chromebooks and students use Google Classroom. Graphic organizers, content-specific glossaries and guided notes are used to support ELLS. We've placed instructional emphasis on close reading, questioning and discussion techniques and argument essay writing. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ENL- The readings are culturally-relevant. Students are encouraged to respond in their own language during group discussions in addition to in English in the content area classes. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We use the interim analysis, New Visions sorter, PD team and School Committee meetings with departmental leaders to ensure ELLs needs are being met. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We coordinate with another school in the building to offer Learning Center after-school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We hold a new student orientation and have a summer bridge program. School administrators and guidance counselors are involved. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 4  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? This is not applicable. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2017-2018 Instructional Focus: Using Assessment in Instruction. This PD series will enable teachers to embed formative assessments into their daily classroom practice so that they may make timely adjustments to support our ELLs as needed. 2016-2017 Instructional Focus: Designing Coherent Instruction. This PD series involved how to plan higher-order thinking activities and offer differentiated support. Teachers co-created a list of differentiation strategies based on their content area. 2015-2016 Instructional Focus: Argument Essay writing. This PD series required all content area teachers (with the exception of Math and LOTE) to design an argument essay task. We designed a school-wide rubric and created resources such as outlines to support our students. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We have an inter-visitation program and an open door policy to support staff in meeting student needs. Staff is provided professional development on Wednesday afternoons. Students are released at 12:02pm so staff may meet. The agendas are kept on a central document by school administration. Individual teachers keep their own log of professional development hours logged. A PD needs assessment specifically for ELL needs is distributed and discussed in the PD team meeting and our PD plan is adjusted as a result. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are invited to meet with their child's ENL teacher during January Regents week. The ENL teacher will confer with the content area teachers to report on progress. Over-the-phone translation services will be utilized when needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We hold PA meetings in which several ELL parents attend. At those meetings, there are sometimes workshops offered to parents. In the past, we have also held parent appreciation dinners. The Parent Association held a Cultural Day event in which food, music, and dance from various cultures were celebrated. 5  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. This is not applicable. 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Gail Lambert, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: BASE School DBN: 17K547 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Gail Lambert Title Principal Diana Boyer Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Melisande Barclay ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ann Marie Coutou Parent Karen Evans Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Kesha Hopkins School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/14/17 06/13/17 1/1/01 06/13/17 06/03/17 06/13/2017 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 09/14/2017 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 17k547 School Name: BASE Superintendent: Donald Conyers The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No JUANITA FRASER ASSISTANT PRINCIPAL No. However, there was Yes a representative * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. language During the ELL Identification Process we conduct the in-person Home Language Identification Survey. We obtain their preferences for both written and oral communication from the Part III questions of the survey. This information is entered into ATS, indicated on blue cards and the written language is noted on the mailing labels. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 9  Language We require translation services in Albanian,Arabic, Fulani, Spanish, Haitian Creole French, Haitian Creole, English, (American) Sign Language, Nepali,Bengali, Tibetan, Urdu and Yoruba. These findings are reported to the school community (particularly teachers and support staff) through staff meetings. This information is also discussed at School Leadership Team (SLT) meetings where students (including ELLS), parents and community partners are present. These findings are also presented at School Committee meetings which represents Lead Teachers in every department. Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2 8 10 3 10 1 17 1 1 1 542 32 1 4 1 .32 1.26 1.58 .47 1.58 .16 2.68 .16 .16 .16 85.49 5.05 .16 .66 .16 Written Preferred Percent Written ALBANIAN 2 .32 ARABIC 8 1.26 BENGALI 12 1.89 CHINESE 4 .63 FRENCH 7 1.1 FULANI 0 0 2.21 .16 .16 .16 86.12 5.21 .16 .63 .16 HAITIAN CREOLE 14 JAMAICAN-CREOLE 1 MANDARIN 0 NAHUATL 1 ENGLISH 546 SPANISH 33 AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE 1 URDU 4 UKRAINIAN 1 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A 0  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you plan Distributed to to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. BASE will utilize the Over-the-Phone interpretation services provided by the Department of Education. BASE will utilize the adult friend/companion or relative chosen by the parent. If available, BASE will use a staff member who speaks the language of the parent Families Parent-teacher conference announcements are disseminated in September, November, March and May. September 28, 2017 Learning Center announcements are sent out in the 2 nd week in November. Super Saturday announcements are sent out in January and May. Parent newsletters from the Principal will begin being disseminated this year in November, February and May. November 9th and 10th March 8th and 9th May 3rd November 9th January 10th May 24th 1  November 8th February 1st May 3 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings Grade team meetings with individual parents Monthly Back to School Night Parent-teacher conference IEP meetings Guidance conferences September 28, 2017 November, March and May How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? BASE will utilize the Over-the-Phone interpretation services provided by the Department of Education. BASE will utilize the adult friend/companion or relative chosen by the parent. If available, BASE will use a staff member who speaks the language of the parent 2  Teacher calls to parents Principal's Suspension meetings FAFSA meetings for financial aid Ongoing Ongoing Ongoing As needed January 2018 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, BASE will utilize the Over-the –Phone Interpretation Services provided by the Department of Education to communicate with limited-English proficient families. As indicated in the Chancellor’s Regulation A-663, parents may rely on an adult friend/companion or relative for language and interpretation services. BASE will maintain the contact information of this person with the emergency contact cards so that he/she may also assist with interpretation in case of an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. BASE staff will receive an overview of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 during the staff meetings in September and February. 3  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We learn about our translation and interpretation needs through the Home Language Survey. Upon enrollment, a student's family meets with our guidance staff, at which point their translation needs are discussed. The guidance office is provided with the Parent Bill of Rights to distribute upon enrollment. We post the translation posters in the main office. Our ELL teacher is sent to ELL trainings as provided by the network. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will use a parent survey to collect feedback from parents. 4 
