2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 32K549 School Name: BUSHWICK SCHOOL FOR SOCIAL JUSTICE Principal: ANA MARSH 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Brooklyn School for Social Justice 32K549 333200011549 9-12 400 Irving Avenue 718- 381-7100 ext. 5001 School Number (DBN): 718-418-0192 Phone Number: Fax: Marilyn Fielder-Whitley MFielder-Whitley@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 32 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Ana Marsh Marvin Carbajal Eva Mendez Michael Bolt Denisse Payano Christian Grant Wendy Diaz Palomares Sonia Sendoya District Information Janice Ross Superintendent: 1396 Broadway, Room 110 Brooklyn, NY 11221 JRoss11@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 455 4635 Phone Number: 718 455 4684 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  32 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Lisa Hyman Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street/Room 507 Brooklyn, NY 11201 LHyman2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 935 3679 Phone Number: 718 935 4456 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ana Marsh Marvin Carbajal Eva Mendez Hazel Loadholt Dania Nieves Christian Grant Wendy Diaz Palomares Jazmin Cruz Michael Bolt Eva Mendes *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ SLT Chair Person Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Denisse Payano Keludys Ogando Ana Santos Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Staff Member/Parentcomm Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview TEACHING AND LEARNING AT BSSJ Mission Statement: The Brooklyn School for Social Justice (BSSJ) will create a community of young leaders demanding the best from themselves today and working together for a more just tomorrow. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. BSSJ is committed to providing a rigorous college curriculum that empowers students to succeed in future academic and professional endeavors and to be informed and active citizens. Furthermore, we are committed to preparing students to take an informed and active role in the social, cultural, and political life of their communities, their state, their country, and their world. Through a curriculum that is grounded in the humanities and sciences, and that is informed by a commitment to social justice, students are provided with a comprehensive academic education and opportunities to see the relevance of that education to their own lives as citizens in a democracy. We are committed to ensuring that every student is held to the highest standards, has constant and consistent opportunities for intellectual engagement, and becomes knowledgeable about and confident in facing the pressing issues of the day. Our community: BSSJ is a professional learning community with a highly collaborative staff, students and parents. Decisions are made through different venues that include administration, staff, students and parents. These venues are Principal’s cabinet, grade team facilitators, SLT/PA, student government, advisory and other systems. Information that guides decisions as well as through which information is disseminated comes from student assessment and other data, department and grade inquiry teams, daily morning meetings, learning walks and inter-visitations, instructional Learning walks, “shadow a student” for the day practices, SLT and other parent learning walks and visits, and student government. The highest areas of celebration for us are usually around our school community and collaboration. Our Partners: The first level of partnership is our building council. The four Principals have built a strong collaborative partnership and worked on applying as a campus to become a community school campus, which we were granted. Through this, we have partnership with many different organizations that serve our students and their families, and our main partner organization is Make the Road New York. In addition to these partnerships and services, BSSJ partners with the Institute for Student Achievement (ISA), Brooklyn College, Medgar Evers College (Pipeline program), Volunteers of Legal Services (VOLS) and several other community based organizations that service our students and families. Our initiatives: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  These are aligned to our school goals, and these include PD, inquiry work and use of data, all through writing. This will continue to be a goal for us because although we have seen a huge increase in the quantity and quality our students are doing, there is still a lot of work to be done in this new school year. Another initiative that we will be implementing in the 2016-17 school year is the AVID program across the school, which we introduced to all 9th graders last year and we saw gains for many students in their writing, reading and organizational skills. This is a college preparatory program. Our data indicates low levels of college readiness based on metrics used and we felt that if we bring in a rigorous program starting from the 9th grade, we will see a gradual increase in the college readiness metric, in a way that is organic and promotes growth and true readiness in students. Another initiative that we have coming at BSSJ is the work on growth mindset. Throughout the years, we have discovered that there is a lack of motivation in many of our students leading to poor attendance, poor academic performance and lack of engagement in school or extracurricular activities. Through some research we ran across “mindset, The New Psychology of Success” by Dr. Carol Dweck. We began to read the research that she has done on growth mindset and how to help students achieve. We applied for the Learning Partners Program (LLP) through the growth mindset lens and were accepted, which is an initiative we are very excited about. Through our work with a host school and two other partner schools, we will engage in doing inter-visitations. Through a year-long process, we will begin the work on growth mindset and will conduct rapid inquiry cycles to gather data, create a plan, implement strategies and so forth. These cycles will help us figure out what strategies and programs we can use school-wide to help our students develop a Growth Mindset. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our student Population: Our student population constitutes: English Language Learners - 30% Students with IEPs 20% Free or reduced Lunch Eligible 85+% (Universal for the last 7 years) Overage Under-Credited 15% Black 20% Hispanic 70% White 2% Other 1% Average Incoming ELA Proficiency (based on 8th grade) - 2.19 Average Incoming Math Proficiency (based on 8th grade) - 2.44 Historically have had a high number of students in temporary housing and have had a large number of undocumented families. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  Elements of the Framework for Great Schools where we have made great progress: Supportive environment, collaborative teachers, strong family-community ties and trust. As indicated above and through feedback from the PPO, leadership academy coach and other visitor, these areas have always been celebrated as part of our strengths as a school community. Effective school leadership is another area of progress and celebration demonstrated through our distributive leadership practices. It is an area of strength that is carried through Principal’s cabinet, grade team facilitators, advisory facilitators, student government, SLT and other areas that encourage leadership and decision making in all constituencies of stakeholders in our school. Elements of the Framework for Great Schools where we need to focus: According to our feedback from the PPO, Rigorous instruction was an area of focus. Although we demonstrated gains in this area, we will continue with this focus. We will also work on creating more cross curricular opportunities for students. The lesson plans submitted throughout the year show alignment to the school’s instructional focus in writing. We need to ensure that professional development is offered to specifically support curriculum and lesson writing that is aligned to CCLS and the instructional shifts, and plan for the maps to be drafted during the summer so that prior to the school year, there is curricula in place for all subjects, including course descriptions that will be further polished throughout the year in order to have a school wide map that is polished and ready to publish in our school’s website if possible 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 32K549 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 364 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 5 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 5 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 82.4% % Reduced Lunch 32.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 75.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.2 0% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 65% 52% 62.5% 1.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups - Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A N/A No N/A 140 129 77.4% 0.0% 21.7% 19.0% 1.1% 1.4% 4 3% 8.1 N/A N/A 65% 58% 75.0% 10% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● Based on the feedback received from both Principal Performance Observations one areas of focus last year was our need to more fully align our curriculum to Common Core Learning Standards, increasing student rigor and engagement. There was evidence of growth in these areas as indicated in our Quality Review and PPO at the end of the year. Nonetheless, we will continue to work on these areas because we are looking to move towards the well developed metric and not just proficient. ● Based on the feedback from the Student perception survey, our school is above the city average in student engagement, yet low for where we need to be. Most classrooms allowed for large numbers of students to be heard during the class, and much of the feedback received from outside observers and staff members were that most classes student centered, with only a few still teacher centered. Although we had gains at the end of the year according to the QR and feedback from the PPO, there is a room to grow. Through the implementation of AVID across the school, our goal is to increase student engagement as measured and indicated by the different forms of assessment the NYC DOE uses. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  ● Our school was identifies as a school in need for improvement in servicing our ENL population. Our numbers increased quickly without the proper structure to support our students. By the middle of the year, we had over 130 ENL students and only four ESL teachers. This year we have hired a 5th teacher and are working at a higher capacity, with more collaborative classrooms to support ENL students, as are ensuring that our ENL and general education teachers receive professional development that helps them address the struggles of the ENL population. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through professional development and implementation of AVID across the grades, at least 1 time a month for teachers, there will be an increase in student led (or collaborative ) classroom practices, that include writing, reading and discussions which will result in a 3% increase in credit accumulation and Regents passing rates for SWDs and ELLs by June 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Weekly Professional Development in department meetings that support the alignment of curricula. All students. ENL, SWD. September 2018-June 2019 Department Chairs, Admin of Instruction, teachers Increase PD for teachers to help them target their work in the areas where students demonstrate highest needs. Frequent classroom visits and feedback, bi-weekly meeting with supervisors and teachers, weekly grade team and departmental meetings All students, ENL, SWD Grade and Department team meetings centered around instruction and analysis of data to guide practice. All students, ENL, SWD September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Grade Team Facilitators, Department chairs, Admin of Instruction Grade team and Department facilitators with support of ENL and SWD Department chairs to ensure support for students with highest needs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School will provide workshops for parents to support them in the understanding of the curriculum. There will also be workshops for parents during Saturdays that will help them understand ways in which they can become involved in the school to support the school community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers and staff will enroll in Professional development conducted by the Brooklyn North Field Office at least 2 times per year. Additionally, teachers will attend AVID training during the summer and throughout the year, as available through AVID. There will also be regular bi-weekly PD for the staff to support in the implementation and training of using the AVID curriculum and strategies throughout all 4 grades. All teachers will get to partake in ongoing 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  training throughout the year at the school with the support of resources and organizations mentioned. Furthermore, teachers will engage in several targeted and small group PD within the school addressing the needs of the teachers and addressing the needs of the school as a whole. Some of these are free resources, and others will be leveraged with community school funds and other funds indicated below in order to serve all students, with emphasis on our ENL and SWD population. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. School will engage in regular inquiry cycle process through weekly meetings and PD, that will be used to collect data to guide practice at the grade team and content level. Data will be used to identify the needs of students, with focus on ENL and SWD population. Review data with Principal’s Cabinet on a monthly basis in order to give consistent feedback to the teams on adjustments needed based on data collected. In February 2019, Cabinet will look at progress towards accomplishments of goals by looking at data from SLT learning walk, Regents and Mock Regents results, student feedback and teacher assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Through the inquiry cycle work at the grade team, departmental team and Learning Partner Program team, we will be able to measure the impact the collaborative classroom practices have with their students and make adjustments based on lesson and unit studies throughout the year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? ●According to our PPO, our school has developed a structure that ensures “a safe and inclusive culture that supports adult learning and enhances student’ academic growth”. ●While some classrooms allowed for large numbers of students to be heard during the class, much of the feedback received from outside observers and those with the school was that many classes were teacher centered.+ ●One practice that we have implemented with significant success is our restorative justice program in which students lead peer mediation and social justice circles to address conflict between students and between students and teachers. We need to prioritize our work with the ENL population due to the high number of incidents they engaged in last year despite the increased level of restorative justice practices in the school. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of ongoing professional development, there will be a 3% increase in restorative justice practices, including community building circles. There will be training provided for staff at least 2 times throughout the year, and a committee working to implement restorative justice practices in the school especially targeting ENL students. We will invite our community schools partner, Make the Road NY, to provide training for parents around restorative justice practices as well as training around how to support their children in their adaptation to a new culture and a new environment. by June 2018 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Professional Development created by teachers, coaches and Administrators that addresses both student led practices and restorative justices techniques The development of our restorative justice class that teaches students how to lead restorative programs. Students will be trained in restorative justice practices. Hiring of new staff that includes Special Education, ELA and counselor to follow the single-shepherd model to support students in academic and social-emotional development. teachers teachers Students students September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Lead teachers, coaches, Admin of Instruction Restorative team, students Hiring Committee made of of Administrations, staff, students and parents. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Community Schools forums, workshops after parent association meetings, parent teacher night and days, Saturday workshops. These will support parents in understanding how they can support their child at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Community School’s grant to provide resources for training on Restorative Justice and Undoing Racism. Advisors, Advisory Facilitators, Model Teachers and students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January 2018 There will be an evaluation of the NYC Performance task data in September 2018. There will be another one in November 2017 and one in February/March of 2019 and we will be compare data to previous years to see trends and positive gains based on trainings and areas that still need work. There will be an end of year NYC Performance task, which will be used to see final progress of students by June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Brooklyn North Field Support Center – School Climate will be contacted to support in tracking the schools’ growth in this areas. We will use internal and city surveys to collect data. Community school funds will be used to obtain training for the staff around restorative justice practices, community building circles and other trainings such as Undoing Racism. We will do internal and city surveys to collect data to assess progress. Data will be collected and monitored with the support of our CBO, Make the Road New York. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X X X X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers and staff and the school are part of grade and department teams. Each has a facilitator who is part of the Principal’s cabinet. Through this work there is a high level of collaboration at different levels within the school, leading to a more collaborative decision making model or distributed leadership model. Through assessment of the work in these and other teams, we have been able to determine that our next level of work is around creating: ●Higher level of consistency across staff surrounding school-wide initiative of writing across the curriculum and implementation of AVID strategies, with special emphasis in supports for ENL population. ●Alignment of school’s instructional focus of meaningful writing across the curriculum leading to higher order Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through the continued work of our school-wide inquiry cycle with focus on writing, students will increase a minimum of one point on average in at least one trait as measured by the New York City Performance Task Writing rubric, by June 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Department and Grade teams will work to align content and skills with the school wide initiative and classroom objectives and activities will be evidence of this alignment. Teachers ●Teachers' schedules have been created to allow grade teams to meet throughout the day in addition to the mandatory 155 minutes to plan together and create more engaging lessons with high order thinking. ●Grade teams meet to endure cross curricular alignment and departments meet to ensure alignment with core standards 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Grade team leaders, Assistant principals and Principal 6-8 week cycles starting in the 3rd week of the school year How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to meet with teams of teachers during parental engagement time. They will also be able to participate in several workshops throughout the year that will be facilitated by teachers and staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The instructional cabinet has continued to develop rubrics to improve unit plans. We have leveraged the experiences of the Special education department by placing them in specific content areas. The team meets to plan and adjust curriculum with proper accomodations, modifications and assessments. ENL teachers also participate in these team planning meetings in order to provide support and input in the work, ensuring that the needs of our ENL population is met. There will be contractual and per-session time allocated for this work. Furthermore, the inquiry and Learning Partners Program (LPP) teams will also engage in a team planning process to address the needs at these levels and to ensure that we address plan to meet this goal horizontally, vertically and with the support of teams like the LPP. The funds allocated for these will come from the LPP funding, as well as funding from Focus school budget. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. December 2018 There will be an ongoing inquiry cycle process that will measure student growth throughout the year. There will be a mid-year (February/March 2018) benchmark to determine students’ growth in the traits and the end of the year test will be used to measure end of year growth for all students (June 2019) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument that will be used by the inquiry team is the MoSL baseline, last year's data, data collected in classrooms and end of the year data, which they will analyze to assess progress, needs, trends and strategies to address those needs. Throughout the year, with benchmarks in February 2019 and June 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ●As evident in our PPO, our principal “has created a system to support the school’s high expectations”. Teachers are encouraged to explore professional development opportunities and turnkey that information with the rest of the staff. ●Based on the data obtained from teacher and student surveys conducted through SurveyMonkey.com, and student perception survey, we have decided to rethink and strengthen our Advisory program as it address many of the social-emotional needs of our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  There will be a 5% increase of teachers targeted attending professional development opportunities that will lead to 3% increase in passing rates for all students by June 2019 - There will be an increase of 3% in teacher led school-wide PDs, that will support students academically and in their social-emotional development. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Built in advisory meetings each week to support teachers understanding of the role of advisory Strengthening our Restorative Justice practices Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teacher advisors, students Students Starting September through June Starting September through June Advisory Facilitators Teachers, Students, CBOs 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. SLT meetings, bring your Child to school day where parents visit their children's classes and then meet with Administration to give feedback on what they saw, SLT walkthrough with the same purpose, but with a particular lens. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Budget will be set aside to allow opportunities for staff to go to PD outside of the school. Teams will take ownership of attending and providing PD. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  We will first assess the mid – point benchmarks in January 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Brooklyn North Field Office, Superintendent’s office trainings and support, AVID, and other city-wide trainings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. This year our campus was designated to be a Community School. As such, we will have access to additional funds and resources to engage families and communities. In working with our Community Based Organization, Make the Road New York, we contributed to the organization of a very successful Community School launch event. Over the last 3 years, the number of responses from parents has been lower than the city average. Also , in talking to parents during our Family walk - through day, several parents and guardians discussed the need for more family involvement. One major area of concern this year has been the decline in attendance of students in school. Our attendance dropped last year. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. - To increase support services provided for families by 3%, This will support us with the improvement of attendance. Through our work we have found out that students with family crisis and lack of resources often are affected and attendance suffers. By supporting with these services, we expect to see at least a 1 to 3% increase in attendance. Services including medical, legal, housing and other services that families need to thrive by June 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Creation of high interest after-school activities for students. Students Providing more platforms to engage parents in school events. Parents/ guardians Starting September 2018 through June 2019 Starting September 2018 through June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Make the Road NY, Teacher, Swimming program and Teachers, Parent Association 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Make the Road New York, Volunteers of Legal Services, Ridgewod Bushwick, Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Community School’s resources to support students and families and provide necessary resources that will lead to higher student success. SLT and PA as venues to encourage more parental engagement and voice. Use of Parental engagement time, Community walk by all staff and other regular venues, to create connections with families. Mental Health providers will support students in the school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Needs assessment conducted by CBO at the beginning of the year as well as benchmark surveys In February 2019 and in June 2019 to assess effectiveness of programs and services provided to families. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Community Schools Grant will be used for the provision of services through our CBO, Make The Road New York. They will conduct all the needs assessments allowing us to monitor progress and results throughout the year and will share results by June 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) -Individual and small group services. -Individual and small group services. -One on one and small group tutoring and mentoring -One on one and small group tutoring and mentoring aafter school Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Writing strategies will be implemented across the curriculum in all major contents. RTI periods will be offered two times a week and teams will determine the students and the targeted intervention support students need based on the data collected from assessments, including student work. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) -This will be determined initially by the Baseline (MoSL and other) data. -intervention provided for subgroups of students needing additional small group instruction. 92 minute block instruction in ELA for all ninth graders during the school day. -Classroom period to46 minutes of instruction during the school day Differentiated instruction to support multiple learners during the school day -Paraprofessional team hired and trained to support students with special needs in all classes. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Inquiry and project-based instruction during the school day Saturday School – 120 minutes of instruction for students behind in credits and struggling learners. -Team teaching in classrooms during the school day. Small group support for special needs students on Saturdays. -Small group Title III support in ESL provided to ELLs on Saturdays. A Learning Lab that includes technology, resources and space for supporting struggling students will be staffed and used for small group and one-to-one as well as tutoring during the school day. -Research based literacy interventions will be provided for all students during the school day and after school. Sustained Silent Reading program will be in place for all 9 th grade students during the school day. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Mathematics Ongoing: Core skills will be assessed using interim assessments and results will be analyzed in conjunction with grade teams using the inquiry cycle to augment instruction. Castle Learning subscriptions will be purchased and utilized to provide students opportunities to study from home and bolster key Regents-related skills. This will be determined initially by the Baseline data for math. -Two46 minute periods of math and ELAfor all 9th tenth graders during the school day. - Increase classroom period to 55 minutes of instruction, during the school day -Differentiated instruction to support multiple learning styles during the school day -Paraprofessional team hired and trained to support students with special needs in all classes. Same as above Same as above Same as above 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  -Inquiry and project-based instruction during the school day -Saturday School – 120 minutes of instruction. -Math class with team teaching for struggling 11th and 12th graders during the school day. -Additional period for struggling 11th graders during the school day. -Small group support for special needs students on Saturdays. -A Learning Lab that includes technology, resources and space for supporting struggling students will be staffed and used for small group and one-to-one as well as tutoring during the school day. Ongoing: -Core skills will be assessed using interim assessments and results will be analyzed in conjunction with department and grade teams using the inquiry cycle to augment instruction. -Castle Learning subscriptions will be 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39 Same as above Same as above Same as above Science purchased and utilized to provide students opportunities to study from home and bolster key Regents-related skills. This will be determined initially by the Baseline data. -Increase classroom period to46 minutes of instruction during the school day -Differentiated instruction to support multiple learning styles during the school day -Paraprofessional team hired and trained to support students with special needs in all classes. - Inquiry and project-based instruction during the school day -A Learning Lab that includes technology, resources and space for supporting struggling students will be staffed and used for small group and one-to-one as well as tutoring during the school day. -An Advanced Biology Elective class will be offered during the school day. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Social Studies - Castle Learning subscriptions will be purchased and utilized to provide students opportunities to study from home and bolster key Regents-related skills during and after school. Ongoing: -Core skills will be assessed using interim assessments and results will be analyzed in conjunction with grade teams using the inquiry cycle to augment instruction. -Students will participate in field trips and other learning experiences outside the building including but not limited to: the Bodies exhibit, The Museum of Natural History, etc. This will be determined initially by the Baseline (MoSL and other) data. -Double 46 minute Global instruction for all 10th graders. -classroom period to46 minutes of instruction during the school day Same as above Same as above Same as above 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  -Differentiated instruction to support multiple learning styles during the school day -Paraprofessional team hired and trained to support students with special needs in all classes. -Inquiry and project-based instruction during the school day -One-on-one support from inquiry team members for twelfth graders who failed Global and/or U.S. History Regents exams during the day. -A Learning Lab that includes technology, resources and space for supporting struggling students will be staffed and used for small group and one-to-one as well as tutoring during the school day. -Social Justice Week will provide presentations and workshops around critical aspects of social justice history during the day. Ongoing: -Core skills will be assessed using interim assessments and results will be 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) analyzed in conjunction with grade teams using the inquiry cycle to augment instruction. -Castle Learning subscriptions will be purchased and utilized to provide students opportunities to study from home and bolster key Regents-related skills. All guidance counselors will discuss their caseloads with the previous counselor to know where to start with each student and where her/his needs are. Furthermore, they will work closely with the SAT, Community Schools social workers and coordinators, community based organizations and Advisors to ensure intervention services for all at-risk students. Same as above Same as above Same as above 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Medical services - clinic, dental, eye exams and others like working papers. 62 students Mental Health services Resources and other services available through community school grant Individualized counseling Referrals to outside services not in the building Academic support and intervention after school and Saturdays Access to online support programs that will support students in writing, math, and science AVID – Academic, College and Career readiness rigorous program. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Any teacher that is not Highly Qualified under the "ESEA" definition will be provided with support in achieving that designation. All teachers at BSSJ are state certified. Teachers attend professional development workshops and retreats regularly to continue developing their craft. All teachers also benefit from ongoing, on-site professional development conducted through grade teams, department teams, and advisory teams. Ninety percent of the teaching staff has taken on some leadership role as a team facilitator, inquiry team member, mentor, and/or COSA and student government coordinator. Additionally, in order to identify and recruit the highest-caliber candidates to teach in our school, BSSJ works closely with members of the community, our partners, members of higher-education organizations, as well as, non-profit organizations whose mission is improving education. Brooklyn College and ISA regularly refer highly-qualified candidates to our school as vacancies arise. A hiring coordinator is responsible for reviewing all resumes. BSSJ also works with the DOE and participates in all hiring fairs. BSSJ instituted hiring open-houses that allow candidates to meet with students and teachers at the school where all parties can ask questions share information. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Staff and administrators participate in ongoing professional development each week in grade team and department meetings both during the school day and after school in order to collaborate on reviewing and continuing to implement aspects of effective teaching practice as outlined in the Danielson framework as well as to incorporate increasingly rigorous instruction into curricula and lessons on a daily and weekly basis. Teachers also participate in PD outside the building through Network support and other optional PD programs. Admin attend principal and AP professional development at the network level as well. Paraprofessionals receive training both in house and through outside PD to support their work with students. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. As part of the work as a PLC BSSJ has created a regular and systematic approach to periodic formative assessment in order to answer the essential question: How will we know when they’ve learned it? BSSJ has designed curriculum infusing the Common Core, essential literacy, numeracy and college skills, and content necessary for our students to succeed in college while remaining true to the social justice core of our school. The results are essential departmental and Core Skills that are taught and assessed regularly over the course of the school year. A formal system of periodic, formative assessment designed to provide clear data on the progress of our students that drives and informs instruction is essential in monitoring these skills. These assessments are meant to measure student learning and provide critical feedback to teachers so that they can tailor instruction and intervention accordingly in a timely manner. Teachers in all disciplines will be expected to administer assessments by four deadlines over the course of the year and use scoring rubrics to generate measurable data on student performance to share with students, families and fellow instructors and staff. These assessments will occur in specific weeks coordinated with early release dates to support grading and analysis of the results. Performance Tasks developed in departmental teams are to be used to measure essential departmental skills and content. Common departmental rubrics will be used to record students’ performance and generate informative data. In addition core grade team skills must be assessed either as part of each instructor’s performance task or as an independent assessment of equal strength and accuracy. School-wide rubrics are used to record student performance and generate data for Core Skills. It is important to note that as the schedule for new mandated DOE assessments is made available adjustments will necessarily be made to our own performance task schedule. The assessment calendar for the 2018-2019 school year is below. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Date Activity/Assessment By September 27th Initial MoSL and baseline assessments must be administered in all disciplines: - ELA and E - Social Studies - Foreign Language - Science - Math - Phys. Ed - Art and Music By November 22nd Second Round of assessments must be administered in all disciplines. By March 12th Third Round of assessments must be administered in all disciplines. By May 20th Final Round of MOSL must be administered in all disciplines. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 258,975.00 16,980 94,263 0 12,366.00 0 2,852,275.00 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) X X X X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Brooklyn School for Social Justice, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Bushwick School for Social Justice, will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Bushwick School for Social Justice , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The community school strategy is integrated into academic instruction in various ways at our school. Our school is an AVID school and the students in the AVID classes receive a rigorous academic experience that prepares them for college both academically and socially. AVID strategies are focused on student centered learning and promoting academic success through college readiness strategies – using methods such as the Cornell method, organizing binders and teaching self-advocacy skills. Teachers will be trained in mindfulness and will used mindfulness and meditation to help students focus and reduce anxieties that keep them from reaching their potential. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Social work interns and community school staff push into advisory and leadership development classes to provide academic enrichment and civic engagement opportunities. Community school Student Success Center Staff (MRNY College Access Program) push into classes to co-facilitate lessons for students around early college planning and awareness, choosing the right school, writing a personal statement, and completing all aspects of the application package. Teachers receive training in mental health challenges and in restorative justice practices to help them better support students and build relationships in the classroom. When students and teachers are in strong community together, students achieve better results. Students are able to access mental health clinicians, free dental and vision screening, case management, mentoring, and restorative justice and mediation services during lunch, after school, and during non-regents classes. Having access to these services as well as all of the classroom push-in and training for teachers provide a well rounded menu of supports that allow students to focus on learning and teachers to focus on teaching while in the classroom. We have seen students who were previously failing classes or refusing to engage – make great strides and improve academically once their needs were being met. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. For the 2017-2018 school year we will continue ensure that each of our support areas are tied to attendance so that we can measure which areas are having the most impact on attendance. 1. Attendance Improvement: By October 1st, at least 40 chronically absent students will be 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  assigned to a school staff mentor, a community school staff member or intern, or a community school Youth Ambassador who will assess strengths to draw on and needs to be met and will ensure that students are receiving appropriate services and participating in community building events. At least 75% of these targeted students will miss fewer days than the previous year and will report feeling a greater sense of connectedness to the school community during a “hot seat” interview. Progress will be measured monthly. 2. Restorative Justice and School Climate: By December 2017, 80% of behavioral incidents will regularly be referred to the restorative justice team, and 80% of students will participate in regular community building circles, resulting in an increase in positive school climate as measured by a twice yearly school wide survey. 3. College Access: By February 2018, 85% of graduating seniors will apply to six or more colleges and 75% of those students will apply for financial aid. By May, 2018 80% of 9th and 10th grade students will participate in early college awareness workshops. By May 2018 80% of 11th grade students will complete a college list and personal statement, and 80% of 10th and 11th grade students will attend a college and career fair. By August of 2018, 70% of graduated seniors who applied to college will be ready to matriculate on their first day. 4. Youth Leadership and Community Building: Our campus cohort of 16 Youth Ambassadors will coordinate and implement monthly community building events also contributing to the increase in perceived positive school climate as reported on the school wide survey each semester. 5. Family Engagement: We will see an increase in family engagement both in and outside of the school. This will be measured by an increase from last year in the number of parents who visit the school, attend events, allow us into our homes, and connect with over the phone. A minimum of 50 parents will attend our community school forum in the spring. 6. Health and Wellness: 45 students will receive weekly therapy from a mental health clinician – 30 by November and an additional 15 by January . 50% of students will access our new school based health center for health services. 85% of students will be screened for vision and all those who need them will receive free glasses. 50 students will receive free dental services. 7. We will see an increase from last year in the number of families who visit the monthly legal clinic and who connect with our Community Engagement Coordinator for access to services such as ESL classes and public benefits application support. 8. By November we will see an increase from last year in the number of students who take advantage of the various extended learning time activities we offer. Overall our vision and goal is to continue to progress on our path to creating a school campus where all who enter feel love and supported, are committed to justice, and are able to reach their own full potential. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? When students feel empowered, heard, loved, and supported by adults and peers in their school, they feel a sense of connectedness to their school community. This gets them through the doors each day. Once they are in those doors, their needs are met, which allows them to focus on engaging in their learning experience. When they are engaged in their learning experience, their academic outcomes are greater. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Make the Road New York (Lead CBO) All students College Access Services Lead CBO and School Staff Students with 70-85% attendance Adult and peer Success mentors, supportive counseling and case By February 2019, 85% of graduating seniors will apply to six or more colleges and 75% of those students will apply for financial aid. By May, 2019 80% of 9th and 10th grade students will participate in early college awareness workshops. By May 2019 80% of 11th grade students will complete a college list and personal statement, and 80% of 10th and 11th Combination of Community School CBO budget, College Access for All Funding, and In Kind from Make the Road NY grade students will attend a college and career fair. By August of 2019, 70% of graduated seniors who applied to college will be ready to matriculate on their first day. By October 1st, at least 40 chronically absent students will be assigned to a school staff mentor, a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  management from MSW or MSW interns Lead CBO and School Staff Families We will implement one community walk each semester, visiting homes of 20 families each walk who are not regular visitors to the school. Mentors and social workers will call parents of students on their caseloads or cohorts at least once a month to check in. Teachers will make weekly phone calls to report positive behavior. MRNY Community Engagement Coordinator will train parent leaders in outreach and organizing. Those leaders will then make phone calls, do door knocking, and community school staff member or intern, or a community school Youth Ambassador who will assess strengths to draw on and needs to be met and will ensure that students are receiving appropriate services and participating in community building events. At least 75% of these targeted students will miss fewer Community School CBO budget days than the previous year and will report feeling a greater sense of connectedness to the school community during a “hot seat” interview. Progress will be measured monthly. We will see an increase in family engagement both in and outside of the school. This will be measured by an increase from last year in the number of parents who visit the school, attend events, allow us into our homes, and connect with over the phone. A minimum of 50 parents will attend our community school forum in the spring. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Interborough Developmental and Consultation Center Targeted students referred by school staff Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment facilitate one on We will see an increase in family engagement both in and outside of the school. This will be measured by an increase from last year in the number of parents who visit the school, attend events, allow us into our homes, and connect with over the phone. A minimum of 50 parents will attend our community school forum in the spring. Combination of Community School CBO budget and DOE funded staff time ones with interested parents. Mental health counseling/therapy 45 students (campus wide) will receive weekly therapy from a mental health clinician – 30 by November and an additional 15 by January . Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Community School and Mental Health funding will be used to support in all the areas indicated here. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. Our Community School Director, Jessica Taube, has been working on campus for Make the Road New York since 2008. She has been the CSD since 2014. Jessica, the Community Engagement Coordinator, and the Youth Ambassadors will implement our annual asset and needs assessment process through focus groups and one on one meetings with staff and students, surveys, community school team meetings, and our community school forum. Jessica will convene quarterly community school provider meetings with other CBO’s and guidance staff to ensure that clear communication and a streamlined coordination of services is happening. As we enter our third full year as a community school, the programs and activities outlined in Section 2/part 2a and in our SMART goals section are based on a thorough and ongoing assets and needs assessment process and are a description of other programming that will be in place to strengthen the initiative. We use a mix of quantitative and qualitative data analysis to ensure the rights students are receiving the right supports. For example, we use the data sorter to filter for a specific attendance trend, then go student by student and have counselors, administration, and CBO staff who know each student give their input as to the challenges the student is facing and ideas for support. We will seamlessly coordinate services by convening regular meetings with school leadership and staff as well as partner CBO’’s in the building – to ensure all are on the same page, referral processes are understood, and a clear schedule is put in place. The CSD and Community Engagement Coordinator will convene monthly community school team meetings. The Restorative Justice Coordinator will coordinate monthly community building circles. The Youth Ambassadors will coordinate monthly community building events. Our Student Success Center Staff will offer quarterly parent workshops on financial aid and the college process. To get families to these meetings Youth Ambassadors will 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  facilitate workshops in the classrooms and conduct outreach in the lunchroom, and then facilitate one on ones with interested students. MRNY Community Engagement Coordinator will train parent leaders in outreach and organizing. Those leaders will then make phone calls, do door knocking, and facilitate one on ones with interested parents. Community School Director and current CST members will outreach to staff and facilitate one on ones with interested staff. We will offer leadership training for parents with Make the Road New York and the Coalition for Educational Justice. We will connect parents to English classes and workshops to develop skills. Our Community Engagement Coordinator will have one on one sessions with parents to discuss goals and strategies to support their students. They will connect parents to teachers when necessary. Our Youth Advocate will also connect with parents of students on her cohort and invite parents to the school (or do home visits when necessary) to set goals along with their child and sit in on classes from time to time to understand better what the students are learning. The Principal and the CSD check in one on one several times a week, and meet along with the other three Principals in the building every other week for a longer meeting to discuss the campus community school strategy. Our attendance team meets weekly and actively uses the New Visions data sorter to track attendance trends and progress of targeted students. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. In addition to Make the Road New York, the following CBO’s and individuals are active and engaged partners in the community school strategy at our school: Interborough (mental health services), RAPP Counselor (mental health – relationship abuse prevention), Yoga (yoga and mindfulness), an African Drumming teaching artist and a Cuban dance teaching artist,Peer Health Exchange (health and mental health workshops for 9th grade students), SMILE NY Dental, and VOLS (monthly legal clinic), Opening Act (theater workshops), and Office of Adult and Continuing Education (Adult ESL classes). We also offer tutoring during renewal hour in the four core subject areas. We have programs in swimming, dance and a Step team. Three focus areas for our CSD this year are restorative justice, connecting every community school staff and intern to a cohort of chronically absent students, and college access. 2. Our community school team is made up of students, staff, and parents from the four schools on campus. All are welcome and will be invited, but at a minimum we will have 2 Assistant Principals, 4 Parent Coordinators, 8 Youth Ambassadors, 4 teachers, and 4 parents. Meetings will be facilitated by the CSD and each month will focus on a different area of the community school strategy. We will give updates on work in that area, look at data, and brainstorm ideas and areas for improvement. 3. As noted above, our attendance team meets weekly and actively uses the data sorter as well as ATS to monitor and analyze attendance trends. We also use the data sorter to address credit gaps and graduation planning. We use a mix of quantitative and qualitative data analysis to ensure the rights students are receiving the right supports. For example, we use the data sorter to filter for a specific attendance trend, then go student by student and have counselors, administration, and CBO staff who know each student give their input as to the challenges the student is facing and ideas for support. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Resources needed are funding for staffing, supplies, events, food, and incentives. Schedule adjustments must be made to allow for a restorative justice class and time to facilitate restorative justice circles. Time in classrooms for college access work must also be allocated. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Our community school strategy is ongoing. Each fiscal year runs July 1st to June 30th. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> Direct instruction will be broken up into different groups with different populations. One group has been chosen to provide enrichment specifically to students at the Entering and Emerging levels, the other is meant for those needing specific content support to prepare for Regents-level literacy. Other levels are able to attend as needed. All groups will receive invitations to attend and parents will be notified in their native language of the sessions and times in a letter and phone calls. Attendance will be kept for every session.Group 1: In order to ensure that our newcomer Entering and SIFE students are able to function in mainstream classrooms, it is necessary to provide them with additional L1 support. This course will be taught by an ENL teacher. Program will be run on Tuesday and Thursday from 2:40 to 3:40. Target group are Entering ENL students with limited to no language background. It may consist of SIFE students and newcomers. They will be taught the alphabet, simple words, phrases and sentences and use the Lexia Power Up program regularly. Group 2: To improve literacy for Regents-level tasks, theses students will be instructed in reading comprehension strategies as well as specific writing skills needed for Regents-level writing. Texts will include narrative excerpts, informational texts and current articles. Students will be assessed using on-demand writing and the Lexia Power Up program. Program will be run on Tuesday and Thursday from 2:40 to 3:40. After School:(76 hours= $4608.64) Reading and Writing Comprehension Tues (Ferreira and Diaz) & Thurs (Ferreira and Roth) (1 hr) January (3,8,10,15,17,22,24,29) 16 hrs =$960 February (7, 12,14,26,28) 10 hrs =$600 March (5,12,14,19,21,26,28) 14 hrs =$840 April (2,4,9,11,16,30) 12 hrs =$720 May (2,7,14, 16, 21, 23,28,30) 16 hrs =$960 June (6,11,13,18) 8 hrs = $480 Supplies: $1700.76 (ETNY Tickets 100@$15 per for a Spring Performance, Karaoke Amp and Microphones@$200.76) Once a month for 7 months teachers and parents will plan and participate in enrichment trips designed to practice and reinforce core subject content and language skills. We call this Explorers. Trips will simultaneously fulfill an alternate purpose; they will be used to build relationships with parents and acquaint them with the academic expectations and familiarize them with the city through real world applications. Each outing will be designed to expose and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information explore locales and to strengthen the relationships between families and our school. Some topics include Immigration, US and Global Culture, the Latino Diaspora. (Explorers’ Club) 2 teachers x 7 trips/6 hours (84 hours= $5093.76) Nov. 17th Museum of the American Indian US History (Diaz-6hrs) Dec.15th LeFrak Prospect Park, Our City US History (Diaz-6hrs) Jan.12th Metropolitan Museum Greek Mythology Democracy? (Diaz-6hrs) Feb. 9th Tenement Museum, Immigration US History (6 hrs) Mar. 16th BBG Living Environment (6 hrs) Apr. 13th Jewish Heritage Museum Global History (6 hrs) May Mets Parent Celebration (6 hrs) Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> Along with additional data points that the teachers will receive from other teachers in ELA & SS classes, the ENL team will use a general classroom diagnostic, Lexia’s Rapid Assessment, Power Up Reports, NYC MoSL and State Assessments to determine the current level of all ENL students. Additional data will be collected from the various forms of work and assessment collected during the after school and Saturday school programs to monitor progress. In addition to the DOE mandated professional development time, the ENL team will meet once a month for 9 months to analyze the data and develop new learning strategies based on the data to ensure that progress is taking place. Records of attendance and agendas will be kept digitally from each meeting in addition to any data to be discussed and protocols used. All ENL Teachers will continue to attend Professional Development related to data usage and ENL progress as available, such as RFSF, EDAT, NYSESLAT and NYSITELL. This group will use ongoing analysis and tracking of data to better assist ENL student progress throughout the year. This group will use data and inquiry to more effectively target skills deficits and improve language and academic achievement. The school will allow teachers to select PD opportunities from the DELLS and other resources including the QTEL and ENL Coordinator meetings.. In addition to the licensed and experienced ENL teachers helping to provide PD, we will seek out PD providers like Kate Kinsella, Hochman, and Nancy Cloud. This work and findings will be shared with the greater school community through grade team and whole school meetings. 3 ENL Teachers x 9 months x 1 hour x $60= $1620 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Part C: Professional Development Oct 19th, Nov 16th, Dec 14th, Jan 11th, Feb 8th, Mar 15th, Apr 12th, May 31st, Jun 14th Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> Teachers will attend the Parent Association Meetings to present ENL information and help to encourage communication with ENL families on the following dates and times: 10:30-11:30 (10/20, 12/15, 3/16, 5/18) or 5:30-6:30 (11/20, 1/15, 2/12, 4/14, 6/14-EOY Celebration) 9 x $60=($540) Topics TBD ENL Parent Engagement Phone Outreach April 29th-May 3rd: 6 teachers x 1 hrs @ $60= ($360) Teachers will inform parents of upcoming NYSESLAT exams, explain importance of attendance and overview of the exam for new parents in an effort to improve completion rates. Theatre of the Oppressed Afterschool / Saturday Workshop 1.5-2 Hours, 10-30 Participants ($650) Date TBD ENL families will engage in the core exercises from the arsenal of Theatre of the Oppressed and participate in a forum theatre demonstration. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 32 School Name The Bushwick School For Social Justice Borough Brooklyn School Number 549 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ana Marsh Coach Charles Glassman ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Chris MacDevitt Teacher/Subject Area S. Swamy / TESOL Teacher/Subject Area S. Caufield / TESOL Related-Service Provider Abraham Sabbagh Superintendent Karen Watts Assistant Principal Michael Bolt Coach N/A School Counselor Frances Carrasco Parent Jasmin Orengo Parent Coordinator Jacquilene Sierra Field Support Center Staff Member Yazmin Torres Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 392 Total number of ELLs 83 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 21.17% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? As a school we use teacher generated diagnostic intake assessments in English and Spanish in addition to the NYSITELL. These assessments provide both content and language ability levels as they align to state and school standards. The results from these assessments help to guide modification of instruction to prepare for student learning outcomes on school, city and state assessments (i.e: Content Area Exams, Regents, NYC Assessment) 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Success in ESL program revolves around a cycle of periodic assessment on both the individual teacher and the grade team level. As students demonstrate mastery, they are promoted to a more challenging context and teacher teams discuss the best approach to the transfer from both academic and social standpoints. Results on local, city and state exams are used to help identify specific skills students need support with and enable teacher teams to address these skills in a more focused manner. This focus helps to keep students on track for AYP as well as providing teachers with important assessment data. Administrative and peer observations provide valuable feedback for measuring progress. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Awareness of student ability in native language is a key factor in planning for successful English learning. Frequent assessment of student progress helps to inform instruction and guide the learning process for individual students. Differentiation enables students to progress in the content while continuing to attain second language skills. Class placement and scheduling are largely determined by the teacher teams and take into account the second language ability of the student. Additional supports, if needed, are also provided based upon second language ability. Programming a specific class of high need ELL students addresses credit and content concerns across grades. RTI is provided to Tier II students through stand-alone double period ENL classes which exceed the minimum minute requirements and our afterschool program which provides weekly classes for Tier II students. We also offer programming on selected Saturdays throughout the school year. Tier III students receive pull-out services from content classes. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data reveals a pattern of student progress during the school year. This information helps to determine class placement, student scheduling and other supports to ensure academic progress for the individual students. Both NYSITELL and NYSESLAT reveal an increase in Entering level ENL students and have necessitated the creation of a Newcomer ENL class. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. There is a combination of instructional models that varies by class and teacher. ELL classes are generally collaborative with co-teachers. The beginning ESL students are scheduled for a double period of stand alone ESL in addition to CTT in two content areas. Lower intermediate students receive a double period of stand alone ESL and two CTT classes in content classes. The intermediate students are programmed for a single stand alone ESL class and at least one CTT 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  content class. Additionally, students at the advanced level are either in a stand alone ESL class or a CTT content class. While ESL teachers push-into classes, they can also pull-out students, depending on the need and situation. Program models see students generally travelling by grades, and not necessarily by blocks. Some classes might have mixed grades and proficiencies. If a situation arises that a student needs more credit, they will be placed in the necessary class. In any case, teachers are expected to serve the needs of all students in their classes. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering students are scheduled a minimum of one double period ESL stand alone and two CTT content, sometimes with an aditional .5 of additional ESL support. Emerging are programmed for a minumum of one double-period stand alone ESL class and two CTT content classes. Expanding ENL students receive a minimum of one stand alone ESL class and one CTT, while Transitioning and Commanding students receive either a stand alone or a CTT class. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Stand Alone ENL classes use a variety of materials and methods. AVID and Springboard are two resources for materials being used in ELA classrooms in conjunction with the ENL teacher in a sheltered environment. In the ENL classrooms, Light Sail Reading program is being implemented in order to promote and track progress in reading comprehension and vocabulary acquisition. All of these programs are aligned with CCLS for rigor and address the shift toward informational and text complexity. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are provided multiple opportunities to demonstrate proficiency in content areas in L1 as needed. Additionally, Regents Exams are provided in translation to ENL students. Newcomer Entering and Emerging students are able to submit work for credit in L1. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiating instruction for ELL subgroups involves the following: g. a) SIFE – afterschool programs and intensive intervention (one to one), pair/group learning model, tailored modified tasks, translated texts. h. b) cooperative learning, translated texts and afterschool support. i. c) Intermediate ELLs, and while ESL instructional minutes are reduced, these ELLs will be offered the same opportunities (intervention, scaffolding, etc.) as early ELL learners. j. d) follow schedules of general education students with additional ELL support, and sometimes become tutors for new ELLs, given their language competency. e) Former ENLs are follow schedules of general education students with ESL support as needed (CTT, stand alone) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  Additionally, all students designated as ENL or Former ENL receive extended time, translating dictionaries and translated copies of exams (when applicable). 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ENL students receive grade level materials with scaffolding as needed in CTT and stand alone ESL classes in order to better prepare them for graduation and beyond. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Programming issues are decided by administration well in advance of actual programming for the new school year. Mandated instructional minutes are calculated as part of the academic scheduling. For example, ESL beginner classes see instructional periods of 480 minutes plus 140 minutes of instructional intervention. Cooperative learning is encouraged in all classrooms so ELLs have a chance to develop in the four language skills. As mentioned above, ESL teachers are actively involved in lesson planning so changes are made to accommodate language needs. While there may be a disproportionate stress on writing and reading, ELLs can still develop in both ESL and RTI classes. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention goals are based on students’ performance on both classroom and formalized assessments (NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, Regents Exams). RTI targets high-need areas of students, and includes content areas. An ENL specific interventions include a scheduled double period of Stand-Alone ENL for Entering and Emerging students. An after school program also targets the newcomer ENL through class meetings twice a week for 1 hour each on Tuesdasy and Thursdays. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The maintenance of Saturday Explorers Club with ESL enrichement trips throughout the year. Strengthening the amount of Parental Engagement and involvement. A more timely use of ENL data to inform instructional practice. Creating new classes to address changes in student needs. Monitoring progress throughout the year using individualized data collection. The use of Light Sail Reading, Brain Pop interactive software, Springboard ELA Curricula, and AVID are new. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ENLs are encouraged to participate in all academic programs. Curricular activities include an Advisory period and access to AP courses in English, Spanish, US History and Biology. In addition to after school, Saturday and RTI programs, there are elective clubs, competitive athletics, social action projects (in conjunction with the non-governmental organization, “Make the Road NY”). There is also a resident program, in partnership with Brooklyn College, that offers both academic and leisure activities. The newly added Healing Arts Initiative (HAI) provides Vocal Arts, Martial Arts, Filmmaking, Mural Painting. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. BSSJ uses a uniform grade-level curriculum for each subject area. Teachers determine the types of materials (e.g. traditional texts, handouts, etc.) to be used in the classroom. Media in the classroom has always played an important role in classroom instruction. Each classroom is equipped with technology -- such as Promethean Boards, access to laptops – that allows all students ready access to the media, which the teachers incorporate into their instruction. Additionally, L1 texts and programs are used to provide access to contents. New technology for this year includes Springboard, AVID, Castle Learning, Light Sail and Brain Pop software. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In free-standing ESL classes, native language is only used when necessary. In cases where students are absolute beginners, teachers use dual language texts that students can utilize. Native language is used primarily to facilitate comprehension of new material, and ELLs, depending on language ability, will frequently receive assessments in their native language since learning outcomes are based on core standards set by the city. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. With rigorous curricula in each of the content courses and a school-wide emphasis on Common Core alignment, grade level texts are presented in context and with necessary scaffolds. By using rich content, students engage in critical thinking and express ideas about grade-level topics. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? BSSJ uses a uniform grade-level curriculum for each subject area. Teachers determine the types of materials (e.g. traditional texts, handouts, etc.) to be used in the classroom. Media in the classroom has always played an important role in classroom instruction. Each classroom is equipped with technology -- such as Promethean Boards, access to laptops – that allows all students ready access to the media, which the teachers incorporate into their instruction. Additionally, L1 texts and programs are used to provide access to contents. New technology for this year includes Springboard, AVID, Castle Learning, Light Sail and Brain Pop software. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). There is an orientation program, the Bridge Program, which introduces all new students, including new ELLs, to the types of programs and services they will encounter at BSSJ. Additionally, parent coordinators and guidance counselors continue to work with parents through workshops and informational sessions to keep them abreast of all new services and general information.Existing services and programs support new ELLs because they are placed according to the number of years in the school system and number of credits from their home country. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Except for the Spanish elective, there are no other language electives offered at this time. However, each of the clubs with a focus on literature provides additional support in both language and content for ELLs through promotion of interaction in English. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All ESL teachers participate in departmental development: These PD sessions address topics such as using data to drive instruction, using team-teaching strategies to support the general education teacher and developing students’ writing strategies. All general education teachers participate in in-house workshops on using ESL strategies in the general education classroom. Youth development personnel participate in in-house training sessions on providing services for ELLs and families of ELLs. Frequent off-site opportunities to attend ESL PD. Specifically, ENL teachers will paricipate in AVID training and learn WICOR strategeis which include Writing, Inquiry, Collabration, Organization and Reading every 3 rd Wednesday of the month. Attend PD preparing teachers of ENL to address the transition to CCLS in ENL and content classes. Access to the catalogue of PD opportunities as listed in the ENL Blast. Additionally, working with Facing History to design curriculum is an added resource to assist with CCLS Implementation. . 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Translated reading materials and other translation services. BSSJ's professional development on ENLs is provided by the ESL teachers and Administrative Team during our Professional Development days at the beginning of the school year as well as the professional development time after January Regents. In addition, since every teacher is part of a teacher team, which is a strong aspect of our school, they get continuous support throughout the year as well. All staff participate in these professional development workshops. Furthermore, our guidance counselors who have attended and continue to attend outside training on working with ELLs provide and guidance to teachers and other staff on helping ENLs with their transition into our educational system in addressing the specific needs of these students. The ENL teachers regularly attend ELL specific PDs to assist with meeting the needs of our ELL populations as we transition toward the Common Core Learning Standards. Records will be logged on a departmental and grade team basis and later compiled at the school level to ensure that both percentages are being met. After the PD plan is finalized, the AP will check school wide completion. ENL Instructors will attend sufficient PD to satisfy the percentage and keep records of all PDs in the ENL cabinet. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The BSSJ parent coordinator works with all parents, including parents of our English Language Learners and our special needs students. In this capacity, ELL parents are invited to the Parent Association meetings as well as receiving workshops specifically geared towards ELL issues. BSSJ provides parent-orientation sessions where program placement options are presented with clarity and objectivity. The meetings focus on orienting the parents to the school system and explaining program options. A video is presented for parents of newly enrolled ELLs in the parent’s home language that provides information on the recent reorganization of the Department of Education and the right to choose educational options for their child, an explanation of the state and city standards, the core curriculum, assessments, student expectations, and school program requirements. Parents are also provided with a brochure in their home language that explains the three program models: Transitional Bilingual Education Programs, English as a Second Language Programs, and Dual Language Programs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  All written communication to parents such as notices to attend meetings, progress reports, brochures, and flyers are sent home in English and translated to the students’ native language. Additionally, interpretation services are a daily help in communication between school staff and parents. These services are offered to increase the involvement of parents in the TBE program, additional funding is available to translate important policy documents, mainly in Spanish. Among the documents we have made available is the school’s Comprehensive Education Plan. Members of the school learning community are asked to translate written communications and serve as oral interpreters as needed. Translation services include translated versions of all documents provided by the DOE in addition to informational and narrative communications with parents. Staff able translate and communicate with parents and students are utilized during phone calls, parent conferences and other instances as needed. Translation equipment is used for workshops and parent events to allow for simultaneous translation. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents and families of BSSJ students, including ELLs, are provided with opportunities to participate in the Parents Association, the School Leadership Team, parent academic activities that relate to building strong home-school partnerships, NYS Regents information sessions, workshops which promote an understanding of performance standards and promotional criteria. BSSJ will support families in accessing information from DOE resources and various community resources and services. To encourage parent involvement, we will continue to: • Conduct yearly Parent’s Association elections for the Executive Board • Conduct monthly Parent’s Association Meetings • Conduct annual parent walkthrough of all classes • Host the regular parent-teacher conferences mandated by DOE and additional sessions for parents of at risk and ENL students • Provide parents with the opportunity for active and meaningful participation on the School Leadership Team • Hold grade-level orientation for parents with classroom teachers, supervisors, guidance, and related-services providers • Distribute all notices in English and students native language when possible • Recognize student/parent accomplishments through annual award dinner Parents of ELLs are invited to school trips, which adds to their culture experience. Our guidance counselor interview parents to assess their interests in contributing to our school community. Parents are critical to the academic success of our students. As a result of our interviews and assessment, we find that we need to continue focusing our efforts in three areas: (1) effective home-school communication; (2) involving all our parents in school decisions and providing services; (3) education for all our parents. Our parent coordinator and faculty, who are fluent in Spanish, act as interpreters and translators for our Spanish Speaking parents when the need arises. Interpreters are available at parent-teacher conferences. The school contacts the Department of Education’s Translation and Interpretation Unit for assistive services for high frequency languages that are not actively spoken by staff members at the school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  2018-19 SCEP-FL 79 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ana Marsh, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Bushwick School for Social School DBN: 32K549 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ana Marsh Title Principal Michael Bolt Assistant Principal Jacqueline Sierra Parent Coordinator Christopher MacDevitt ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jazmine Orengo Parent Sabrina Swamy Teacher/Subject Area Sarah Caufield Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Frances Carrasco School Counselor Karen Watts Yazmin Torres Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: K549 School Name: Bushwick School For Social Justice Superintendent: Karen Watts The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We will utilize the RHLA report to regularly update our families home languages. Several forms of data collection are used to assess language preferences of the parent community at BSSJ. - Individual meetings with parents - Blue cards - Potential parent info collected at school fairs 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  - Parent Teacher Association - students 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language English, Spanish, & Arabic 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Disseminated documents - Welcome letters - Notifications, i.e., cell phone policy, handbooks, chancellors regulations, opt-out letters, parent teacher conference notices, progress reports, report cards, skedula invitations, special announcements from the Principal, school programs, permission slips, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Typical formal face-to-face meetings - Parent teacher conferences (as scheduled by the DOE and 2 weeks before the end of each marking period) - PTA Meetings (as scheduled by the parent coordinator and the PTA council) - Award Ceremonies (June) - Signing of Face to Face letters - Guidance intervention meetings - Pre-Suspensions - Return from superintendant suspensions - student transfers - New Entrants 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school has a 20% population of English Language Learners. 60%- 70% of the entire student body is of spanish heritage whose parents may or may not speak English. Every document that leaves this building is translated into spanish. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? - Parent Surveys - Feedback from parents at school day - Scheduled annually by the schools SLT team in which parents visit their child's classes and then give feedback on their experience. - Parent Walk through - Also arranged by the SLT team, but usually consists of the SLT team giving constructive feedback on what they observe in the classrooms and offer suggestions about things they would like to see. - Community walk - An event that is part of the BSSJ culture in which we visit the homes of the students in our school. The purpose is not to talk about the child's performance, but more so to ask how is the school serving their needs and to ask if there is anything that they would like to have in place to assist them. We will consider other ways to assess our culutral sensitivity including small group discussions with parents and staff. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 85 
