2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 19K557 School Name: BROOKLYN GARDENS ELEMENTARY SCHOOL Principal: CIANI ESPADA 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Brooklyn Gardens Elementary 331900010557 School Number (DBN): 19K557 Pk-5 School Address: 574 Dumont Avenue Phone Number: 7184957012 Fax: 7184957018 School Contact Person: Susana Morales Email Address: smorales4@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 19 Superintendent’s Office Address: Ciani Espada Nadine Atresino Shatisha Lucas Nicole DeMarinis Shakeima Bowers n/a n/a n/a District Information Dr. Thomas McBrydeJr. Superintendent: 557 Pennsylvania Avenue Brooklyn, New York 11207 tmcbryde@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-240-2700 Phone Number: 718-240-2727 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Avenue Brooklyn, NY Bfitge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-3414 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) CianiEspada Nadine Atresino Shatisha Lucas Shakeima Bowers Thomas Hackett Francheska Cepeda Nicole DeMarinis *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Chailene Dumas Keith Logan TomeekaWorrell Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We have a Vision - Section 4: CEP Overview We will inspire children to cultivate a love for learning, spark their curiosity to discover their world and develop their place within it, motivate them to achieve success, take ownership and have fun! We have a Mission -   We are committed to meeting the needs of our children, staff, families and community by making purposeful decisions about the school environment, curriculum and instruction. Our student-centered approach and learning experiences, coupled with valuable partnerships with organizations and families supports our children and community in growing socially, emotionally and academically. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Brooklyn Gardens Elementary School (BGES) has been a growing school, with the 2016-2017 school year being the first year as a Pre K-5 school. We are one of the city’s first 45 Community Schools. As we have grown we continue to focus on empowering students, families and staff to continue to increase student awareness, ownership and achievement. Equity Statement: Brooklyn Gardens Elementary is committed to equity for parents, teachers, and students because we believe that by working together in creating a culture of opportunities for all will promote a community in which all stakeholders hold a belief system that all children can learn. This will be established by: Fostering and interweaving an intellectual, and social justice into a culturally relevant curricula   Celebrating similarities and difference  Offering resources and opportunities for all individual needs  Supports and interventions embedded to ensure all students are successful Instructional Focus: Students will increase discourse by engaging in high quality discussion, exemplified by responding to and extending each other’s thinking, as well as crafting language to help each other deepen and elaborate upon their thinking, to demonstrate mastery of the Common Core Learning Standards. School Culture Focus: All members of the BGES School Community will take ownership of their actions and responsibilities by sharing a clear vision and plan, using a common language to communicate effectively, providing support and feedback to each other, and following through on expectations in order for all BGES members to feel safe, respected, and challenged. Collaborations/Partnerships/Special Initiatives - As a Community School our focus is to promote wellness; healthy minds, bodies and hearts. As we continue to focus on education we emphasize that education goes far beyond academics. Our school community is committed to empowering each other to seek healthy minds, bodies and hearts! Our lead CBO, community based organization, is Partnership with Children (PWC) whom opened with us in September 2013. Partnership with Children supported us in leading the way to strengthening social and emotional skills. They strengthened the culture of the school community in: increasing student attendance and on-task learning; improving teachers’ classroom management skills; reducing school violence, suspensions, and other disciplinary referrals; reducing bullying; supporting families in accessing mental health care; engaging families in their children’s education; and ultimately improving overall academic achievement. As we continue this work this year awareness of self, community and the environment and student innovation are at the forefront of our work as we will empower our children and families to take ownership of their changing community. We have already begun this work with the creation of our school garden which our students, along with their families, cultivate. As we continue to strengthen our hands on approach to learning, we are designing 0  units of study that offer our students the opportunities to investigate and explore their world through an experiential, project based approach. Throughout many of the units the focus on community and environment will run through, as students gain 21st century skills and global awareness. We believe firmly that in order for our students to define their own place in this world they must understand it. We have recently began a Green Initiative and have partnered with Edible Schools, GreenThumb, GrowNYC, Captain Planet, East New York Farms, Brooklyn Botanic Garden and Cafeteria Culture as we are becoming an Eco Action School. As of September 2015, we initiate an on site garden as well as an off site Environmental Education Garden Center. Staff, students and parents are a part of the Eco Action Team and making informed decisions about this work and the changes in the community. Other partnerships and collaborations include: - Generation Ready has partnered with BGES to build educator knowledge, improve teacher practice, and increase student achievement in literacy and mathematics. - Elite Learners, who infuse character development, literacy and song writing into a program for our grade 2-5 students. - NYC Parks Deptartment - Swim 4 Life partners with our Second Grade to teach swimming skills, and support students in overcoming fears. - Brooklyn Botanic Gardens Project Green Reach partner with our Grade 3 to provide hands on, real world learning opportunities to students within an interdisciplinary curriculum. - All Prek and K families have a Cool Culture Club card which provides access for students and their families to visit museums, environmental centers, and other cultural institutions across the city. - Partnership with Children is housed in our school and is the Social and Emotional Learning, SEL, support system for BGES. Three full time social workers and three interns are on site most days. They provide 1:1, pair, small group and whole class lessons and supports as well as family workshops and supports. - Young Voices, Big Sounds brings song writing and musical instruction to all of our students. - Studio in a School supports in the development of student and staff art appreciation, knowledge, and skill. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Student Populations and Needs: Students with Disabilities - 28% Needs-  Visual cues and prompts to access learning tasks  Manipulatives to support conceptual understanding in literacy and mathematics    Language development - phonemic awareness, vocabulary, fluency Small group explicit and guided instruction Fluency of mathematical skills 1  English Language Learners - 8%  Vocabulary development  Opportunities for oral speaking - prompts and targeted peers to engage in discussions  Visual cues and prompts Students in Temporary Housing - 26%  Attendance supports to ensure students are present to learn  Mentors to build relationships to support social emotional development  Family supports including housing, strategies to use at home that support student learning, basic needs (food, supplies, clothing), extended care. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Framework for Great Schools: Elements of most progress- Strong Family-Community Ties Identified areas of progress: teachers work closely with family to meet child's needs families are greeted warmly families are provided with opportunities to visit classrooms and observe instruction regular communication with families and community members      parent-principal trust in building relationships Rigorous Instruction Identified areas of progress:   students show they respect peers ideas during discussion teachers have the tools they need to include multiple opportunities for students to interact with complex grade-level texts  established a checks for understanding system Effective School Leadership  program coherence - 22% increase of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at the school leadership followed up with the new programs to make sure they are working tracking student academic progress communicating clear vision and setting high expectations    provided clear professional learning to build systems and structures and pedagogical knowledge 2  Key areas of focus - Rigorous Instruction  making thinking visible  questions and discussion techniques  providing scaffolds and differentiations for individual learners needs Supportive Environment  Peer to peer support for Academic Work   Classroom Behavior Social-Emotional Development (students developing skills) 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K557 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 308 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 31 23 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 95.5% % Reduced Lunch 6.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 31.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.25 0% 26% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 20.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 59% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YSH N/A NO YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 33 41 90.5% 1.6% 32.1% 65.9% 0.0% 0.6% 2 0% 6.4 12.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As noted in the Framework for Great Schools Report, Quality Review, and supported through Advance data, Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) data, teacher and parent surveys and analysis of student work products: Strengths: ● A shift in pedagogical practice of decreasing largely guided modeling time, and increasing student discovery and ownership through collaborative groupings and independent tasks that will support the development of critical thinking skills and ambitious cognitive engagement. ● Learning Stations across classroom to provide a range of learning tasks for diverse learners. ● Teachers use the Common Core Learning Standards, social studies scope and sequence and resources from Scholastic and Ready Gen to develop interdisciplinary English language arts curriculum that incorporates a progression of learning station opportunities. ● Teachers use Math Exemplars to increase students’ exposure to real world, multi-level problem solving. ● Writing emphasizes use of evidence from sources to inform or make an argument. ● Instruction is customized to incorporate out of classroom experiences linked to building content knowledge, collaboration and communication skills, and academic skills and practices. ● Partnership with Children social workers work with teachers to plan opportunities within the curriculum that support students in developing rigorous habits that include working collaboratively with their peers, expressing themselves verbally, planning, organizing and self-monitoring. ● Data informed groupings to target student needs and strengths ● Design and analysis of standards-based, engaging tasks across all content areas. Needs: 5  ● Building academic vocabulary and language across all subjects areas through the use of language stems to increase achievement in student writing and discussion. ● Scaffolds and extensions for higher achieving students need to be strategically implemented in unit and daily planning and instruction. ● Evidence of student initiation of inquiry and student contributions to the exploration of important content. ● High leverage questioning that fosters deep thinking and student discussion. Priority: Designing data driven coherent instruction that includes high leverage practices, questioning and opportunities for discussion while they tackle CCLS aligned tasks with scaffolds and extensions for all students to perform at high levels of mastery. THEORY OF ACTION If the principal… then teachers will be able to…. so that students will be able to… provides teachers with opportunities for professional learning focused on innovative best practice with discourse in mathematics facilitate conversations around mathematical concepts with students, providing them opportunities to access prior knowledge and apply new learning, take ownership of and expand their learning through conversation about their mathematical thinking, thereby improving overall student performance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will facilitate discourse around mathematics, which will result in a deeper understanding of mathematical concepts for all learners, as measured by a 5% increase in students meeting the Common Core Learning Standards based on New York State exam results for grades 3-5 and New York City Performance Tasks for grades K-2. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Literacy and Math Instructional leads will provide teachers with support school wide in analysis of individual student data in the areas of ELA and Math. All educators September 2018-June 2019 Math and Literacy Instructional Leads, Peer Collaborative Teacher, NTC Mentors, Assistant Principal, Principal Professional Development will be facilitated on interpreting data and utilizing the information to develop curriculum units, culturally relevant curricula tasks which are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Instructional leads and administrators will support teacher teams in the development of organized CCLS aligned unit plans in Reading, Writing, and Math through an organized school-wide cohesive system, incorporating discourse protocols, ultimately building capacity on teacher teams to fully lead grade-wide unit planning. All educators will participate in professional development of the Comprehensive Literacy Model through a partnership between the school, district, Field Support Center, and Scholastic. All educators will participate in cycles of Professional Learning in collaboration with Generation Ready Consultants for Math and Lit-Life Consultants for Literacy instruction with partnership between the FSC, District 19 team and in school coaching. All educators will use the knowledge gained to improve teaching practices and increase student achievement in literacy by ensuring students receive effective instruction in all components of the literacy model, with a focus on the Scholastic All educators September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Instructional Leads, Lit-Life Consultants, Generation Ready Consultants, Assistant Principal, Principal 7  Comprehensive 4 Pillars in Literacy-Guided Reading, Writing, Independent Reading, and Speaking/Listening. All educators will use the knowledge gained to improve teaching practices and increase student achievement in math by ensuring students receive effective instruction providing high leverage practices in math instruction. Administrative, instructional staff and teacher teams will meet during common planning times to plan for culturally relevant questioning and discussion techniques into lesson plans as well as multiple entry points for all learners. All educators September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Leads, Assistant Principal, Principal All educators September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Leads, Math AIS Teacher, SETSS provider, ENL Teacher, Assistant Principal, Principal Teacher teams will use the Collaborative Teacher Team Plan to guide inquiry based protocol led meetings in order to analyze data to inform instructional planning. Strategies to address high-needs student groups: -Explicit Instruction -Guided small group instruction to support with prerequisite skills needed to achieve mastery on the task -Cooperative grouping to use peers as resources -Targeted feedback aligned to rubrics and models. Targeted groups of students will receive additional literacy supports, as determined by quarterly data, using the Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention Kits and iReady. Targeted groups of students will receive additional math supports, as determined by quarterly data, using Go Math intervention kits and iReady Math. 8  Targeted Professional development opportunities will address needs for specially designed instruction to support making gains in literacy and mathematics. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent engagement opportunities will be provided to parents on a monthly basis from September 2018 to June 2019. The key personnel will be Administration, Parent coordinator, Community School Director, Instructional Lead Teachers, Teachers, CBO Partnerships -Parent University Courses which include: Common Core Learning Standards 101 Questioning and Discussion College and Career Readiness Literacy Workshops Mathematic Workshops Social-Emotional Workshops -Tuesday Parent Engagement Sessions to support individual needs of families Meeting the Needs of Different Learners Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Coach/Peer Collaborative Teacher, Math Lead, Literacy Lead, SETSS Provider, Assistant Principal, Principal, Parent Coordinator, Community School Director Instructional Resources: 9  Increase of access to technology to support targeted learning and engagement (increase forum for sharing learning), parent resources (books, videos, manipulatives) Schedule Resources: Per session to support planning sessions, flexible scheduling to support all learners in increasing student achievement in the lest restrictive environment, use of Monday afternoon PD time to support PD sessions for teachers, Tuesday parent engagement time to support classes for parent engagement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point Checkpoint: By February 2019, unit plans for Modules 1-3 in Mathematics will be completed to include a cohesive format and elements across all grades, incorporating discourse protocols throughout, as evidenced by a 75% increase in teacher performance on the Danielson's Framework Components 1a, 1e, and 3c, as well as a 5% growth percentile of student progress in grades K-5 as measured by interim assessment data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) -Collaborative Teacher Team Meeting Logs and artifacts -Danielson Framework for Teaching -Common Core aligned performance tasks - Interim Assessment - F&P Running Records - MOSL -NYS ELA & Math State Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths:     School-wide expectations have been developed by all stakeholders and are internalized School-wide improvements evidenced by decrease in occurrences and the level of incidents In depth knowledge of students as case study during weekly CARE (Children Are Reason Enough) team meetings Small group targeted instruction across all k-3 classes daily school-wide to meet student need in a supportive environment  Teachers pull students whom are struggling or have missed school to support them  Partnership with community based organization, Partnership with Children, whom provides whole class, small  group and individual supports to children, as well as to families and staff Students are provided with tools to share how they are feeling and to identify what is causing them to feel a particular way  Every day begins with Circles which is built into all class schedules as a way to begin each day positively, foster trust and safety, encourage discussion, and assess student needs and strengths socially and emotionally  Every Monday morning there is a school-wide Community Circle to celebrate academic, physical and SEL progress, as well as to ensure everyone understands the expectation  Attendance Initiative with mentors to press the importance of coming to school every day and systems to monitor attendance Needs:  Analyzing data for individual student behavioral needs to increase self-awareness and self-regulation and reflection Improved feeling of safety in the playground and the cafeteria  Common language and practices around SEL, supports and expectations.   Teaching students organizational skills needed to succeed    Peer mediation Students taking ownership of actions and reactions Students supporting peer' learning Priority: Collaborative and cohesive social emotional development plan to strengthen the culture of the school that supports and holds all stakeholders accountable to high expectations. THEORY OF ACTION 1  If the principal… models the participation of strong relationship building and communicates clear expectations around culturally aware discourse, as well as provides stakeholders with professional learning opportunities to broaden knowledge of best practice in discourse, Part 2 – Annual Goal then teachers will be able to…. so that students will be able to… build stronger positive relationships with students, as well as facilitate culturally aware instruction and conversations, feel safe to take intellectual and social risks in expressing their beliefs, emotions, ideas, and learning, resulting in an environment of high quality respect and rapport. Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all stakeholders will build positive relationships, and collectively increase all academic and social interactions with students, by engaging in respectful exchanges with one another through discourse, acknowledging the diverse cultures and students’ backgrounds inside and outside of the classroom, which will result in 100% of teachers rated effectively in components 2a of the Danielson Framework. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Partnership with Children follows a research based CASEL curriculum to increase self-awareness, social awareness, conflict management, relationship skills and responsible decision-making. They push into classes to model for teachers how to be a supportive leader. Their services include individual counseling, socialization groups, targeted small groups, whole class cycles of support, family intake and support and staff supports. From the onset it is articulated and understood that there is confidentiality unless safety is a risk and there is always open communication. Furthermore, they model and practice consistency and follow through with words and actions. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Staff, Families, Students, Community September 2018-June 2019 CBO, Students, Principal, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Parents PWC leads a weekly child study meeting with the CARE team to analyze student data and staff reports to identify areas of student need and support in academic and social emotional areas, to determine additional supports, and to monitor progress of students. Staff, Families, Students, Community September 2018-June 2019 CBO, Students, Principal, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Parents Staff, Families, Students, Community September 2018-June 2019 CBO, Students, Principal, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Parents Create a Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS) team comprised of staff, parents, and student mentors. Training for the PBIS team to develop a deeper understanding of PBIS and create sustainable systems and structures. Professional Development for staff to develop a deeper understanding of PBIS. Staff implementation of the PBIS structure with fidelity. Monitor student progress of personal and academic targets using a daily target survey and student work products. 3  Gather data on school culture from all stakeholders through the use of monthly Google surveys. Implementation of Sanford Harmony Buddy-Up to increase peer to peer support in personal behaviors and academic learning. Circles structure embedded in to every class schedule with clear expectations. All classrooms in grades K-5 will host "Morning Meetings" daily to allow for an opportunity for students to express themselves and engage socially, encouraging social-emotional learning and growth. All classrooms in grades K-5 will engage in a weekly "Culture Hour" in which classes engage in culturally aware activities in the areas of, but not limited to, ethnic background, community, family, school, social-emotional, etc. All classrooms in grades K-5 will participate in monthly "Cultural Celebrations" which will result in the presentation that represents topics such as, but not limited to, ethnic regions, cultural dance/food/clothing, influential people, etc. These presentations will be shared with the school community and families in the form of, but not limited to, performances, visual arts, oral presentations, travel brochures, etc. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. -Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, and Community School Director will design and provide differentiated trainings, workshops, and volunteer opportunities for parents/caregivers, and community members with a specific focus on the school wide expectations and their connections to home expectations. -A school wide parent outreach policy will be created to increase Parent Engagement on Tuesdays by creating a calendar of events, targeted goals, logs of communication, and parent questionnaires. The key personnel will be the guidance counselor, parent coordinator, community school director, parents and lead teachers. Engagement opportunities will be provided to parents on a monthly basis from September 2018 to June 2019. 4  -Monthly Cultural Celebrations, in which families will be invited to presentations by classes honoring thematic cultural topics and themes. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustments as a PROSE school allow for specific time in the schedule to support Circles. The Sanford Harmony resources will be use to support Buddy-Up. The ruler work for structured morning meetings will allot for students to circle up to support in peer relationships. Our Community Based Organization will be a key leverage in supporting students with peer relationships and support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all classes in grades K-5 will have embedded "Morning Meeting," "Culture Hour," and "Cultural Celebrations," into their routines and will have hosted a minimum of three family invited celebrations. An increased level of respect and rapport in the classroom environment will be evident as measured by a 75% increase in teacher performance on the Danielson's Framework Component 2a. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. -Advance observations -Observable student work/performance in culturally aware activities and presentations. Academic and personal behavior self-reflections -Monthly OOR reports, anecdotal notes, observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As noted in the Quality Review, and supported through Advance data, Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) data, teacher and parent surveys and analysis of student work products: Strengths: ● Teachers visit each others classrooms through peer inter-visitations for self-identified supports, building capacity within the expectations of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. ● Teachers participate in an item analysis of pre and post assessments in mathematics making direct links between student performance and teacher practice. ● There is a collective responsibility between General Education and Special Education teachers and paraprofessionals to support all learners. ● Teacher teams meet weekly to analyze student work products through the use of protocols to improve student outcomes. ● Scheduling provides for common periods for teachers to collaborate on planning and preparation. ● Teachers take the lead and initiative for school wide and community improvement and empowerment projects. Needs: ● Structure for cycles of learning in professional learning communities through weekly meetings and peer instructional rounds, with targeted feedback to improve teacher practices and increase student achievement. ● Vertical quarterly meetings to support the learning progressions across grades by analyzing unit and daily plans, and student work products to provide feedback for increased student achievement. Priority: Teachers collective responsibility for all students to learn, and supporting each others professional practices through inter-visitations, reflective feedback and analysis of student work. THEORY OF ACTION 6  If the principal… then teachers will be able to…. so that students will be able to… communicates an organized plan and makes strategic organizational decisions that allow for teacher teams to meet on a regular basis, Part 2 – Annual Goal collaborate on grade teams, vertical teams, and with support staff over data, best practices, and action plans to inform instruction, have access to rigorous instruction that meets their individual learning styles and needs leading to growth in student performance. Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will engage in a structured inquiry based action research team using a protocol in which they will analyze student data to make instructional decisions resulting in every teacher moving one level up on the Danielson Framework in components 1e and 3d. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Clear articulation of instructional focus and school vision All educators August 2018 to be implemented with time frames June 2019  Articles/text to support research and implementation of Instructional Leads, Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal peer inter-visitations  Creating opportunities for teachers to engage in teacher discussion around best practices and techniques to improve student outcomes  Data Talks with a focus on identifying the needs of individual students to target the needs of diverse learners  Using current data to make daily instructional decisions  Teacher teams will use the Collaborative Teacher Team Plan to guide inquiry based protocol led meetings in order to analyze data to inform instructional planning. All educators August 2018 June 2019 Data Lead, Instructional Leads, Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal  Designing coherent instruction during teacher teams All educators August 2018 through analyzing lesson plans, student work, and teacher practice  Modeling and demonstrating coherent instruction Instructional leads and administrators will support  teacher teams in the development of organized CCLS aligned unit plans in Reading, Writing, and Math through an organized school-wide cohesive system, incorporating discourse protocols, ultimately building capacity on teacher teams to fully lead grade-wide unit planning. June 2019 Instructional Leads, Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal  Peer observations and conversations to inform how All educators August 2018 curriculum can be modified, instructional groupings can be formed, the level of rigor can be increased, and how student observations and work products are used to drive future instruction June 2019 Instructional Leads, Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 8  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent engagement opportunities will be provided to parents on a monthly basis from September 2018 to June 2019. The key personnel will be Administration, Parent coordinator, Community School Director, Instructional Lead Teachers, Teachers, CBO Partnerships -Parent University Courses which include: Common Core Learning Standards 101 Questioning and Discussion College and Career Readiness Literacy Workshops Mathematic Workshops Social-Emotional Workshops -Tuesday Parent Engagement Sessions to support individual needs of families Meeting the Needs of Different Learners Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: ● Instructional Coach ● Instructional Leads ● Administration ● Per-session funds for PLC weekly meeting Instructional Resources: ● Research, articles, videos that support school vision of how children learn best ● Instructional Rounds texts Schedule: ● Scheduled Time for cycles of data talks 9  ● Schedule adjustments for inter-visitations (per diem substitutes possibly) ● Scheduling for Instructional Fridays ● Common planning periods Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teacher teams grades K-5 will have engaged in Collaborative Teacher Team meetings, following an inquiry research based approach, as measured by documentation artifacts from each of at least two meetings per month. This will result in 75% of improved teacher performance in the Danielson's Framework Components 1a, 1e, and 4e. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. -Danielson's Framework for Teaching Advance Observations -Collaborative Teacher Team Meeting Logs and artifacts -Student work products with Common Core aligned rubrics Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  Communicates clear vision  Understands how students learn  Sends daily “Sprouts” email to consistently and communicate-press vision  Creates opportunities for teacher leadership and shared decision-making  Creates a sense of community with all stakeholders  Makes strategic organizational decisions to address student learning needs  Participates in instructional planning and models effective teaching practices to provide guidance Needs:  Monitoring and carefully tracking student progress school-wide and make informed instructional decisions daily for all content areas.  Refining the work that teachers engage in during teacher teams to analyze data, to develop plans that are responsive to student needs, so that grading practices and feedback effectively guide students to improve student’s thought processes and work products  Pressing teachers and holding them accountable to implement what they have learned in professional development in a timely manner The priority need is carefully monitoring and tracking student progress school-wide to make intentional decisions that impact student achievement. THEORY OF ACTION If the principal… clearly communicates high expectations through transparent organized plans, systems, and structures to allow for effective PLCs Part 2 – Annual Goal then teachers will be able to…. so that students will be able to… facilitate the action plans set forth toward meeting the CEP goals and instructional focus, have access to rigorous instruction that meets their individual learning styles and needs leading to growth in student performance. Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1  By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have access to professional learning opportunities to support their professional growth toward achievement in our instructional focus and CEP goals, through transparent clear communication of a coherent data driven vision of school improvement, and intentional strategic organizational decisions, that will result in growth in 100% of teachers showing growth of at least one level in the Danielson's Framework components 1a, 1e, 3c, and 3d. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The development of clearly organized plans to include clear communication of expectations and protocols around school systems, structures, and initiatives. All Staff September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Leads Monthly Principal's SPROUTS Newsletter distributed to staff to support communication of school accomplishments and events, as well as to inform our direction ahead as a school community All BGES School Community October 2018-June 2019 Principal Management of BGES Google Drive in order to support the transparency, cohesion, and collaboration of school systems, structures, and initiatives. All Staff September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Leads, Teacher Teams Weekly data team meetings across grades using a protocol to analyze student work products and develop implications for teaching practices including planning and instruction. Weekly progress monitoring team meeting to analyze data, identify trends and implications for instruction, using the structures and tools in Paul Bambrick-Santoyo’s Driven by Data. Teacher teams will use the Collaborative Teacher Team Plan to guide inquiry based protocol led meetings in order to analyze data to inform instructional planning. Structure Data Talks with teachers on 4 week cycles to engage in targeted discussions around addressing needs for all learners. Design professional learning focused around designing meaningful assessment and using assessment to drive instruction. (Meetings, inter-visitations, buddy system) The data specialist will provide teachers with school wide, as well as individual student data in the areas of ELA and Math. Professional development will be facilitated on interpreting data and utilizing the information to develop curriculum units and All educators September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Data leads, Assistant Principal, Principal All educators September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Data leads, Assistant Principal, Principal All educators September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Data leads, Assistant Principal, Principal All educators September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Data leads, Assistant Principal, Principal 3 rigorous tasks which are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Questioning and Discussion techniques will be embedded in all units and lesson plans. AIS and RTI action plans to support targeted groups of students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The key personnel will be guidance counselor, parent coordinator, community school director, parents and lead teachers. Engagement opportunities will be provided to parents on a monthly basis from September 2017 to June 2018. Differentiated Data Talks and Instructional Meetings with Parents: -Grade wide parent focus meetings -SWD parent focus meetings -ELL parent focus meetings Additionally continue coffee chats, monthly community schools meeting, family nights, and surveys to continue positive relationships and gather reflections from parents and caregivers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Schedule supports common planning at least three times a week, with one 90 minute block. -Per session to support data lead team and targeted population team work. -Peer Collaborative teacher role 4  -Instructional Leads in Mathematics and Literacy Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the principal will have provided clear organized plans and a variety professional development opportunities geared toward meeting the instructional focus and CEP goals to teacher teams, resulting in a minimum of 75% of teachers showing growth of at least one level in the Danielson's Framework components 1a, 1e, 3c, and 3d. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. -Collaborative Teacher Team Meeting Logs and artifacts -Documented plans and protocols -Contributions to Google Drive folders Fountas & Pinnell running records -Danielson Framework for Teaching Advance observations -PPO Rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Families are seen as partners in helping students learn.   Teachers meet with families to understand parents’ problems and concerns.  The principal pushes teachers to communicate regularly with families. Teachers communicate to families about support needed to advance the school mission.  Parents are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school.  Parents attend monthly Family Fun Nights.  There is an increasing amount of parents attending parent nights and communicating with teachers on Tuesday’s parent engagement time. Families are enthusiastic about and rely on the school’s monthly calendar.  Needs: Inviting parents to visit classrooms to observe them instructionally.   Regularly communicating with parents about how they can help their children learn.  Parent volunteers and parent led initiatives at the school.  Teachers working closely with parents to meet students’ needs. Priority: Parents partnership in increasing student academic performance. THEORY OF ACTION If the principal… then teachers will be able to…. so that students will be able to… strategically makes organizational decisions to allow for... inform family members of school events, celebrations, and school-based opportunities via web-based programs and social media, have their family members gain a higher level of access to, as well as provide feedback on, school happenings via web-based programs and social media. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 6  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, BGES will implement a social media campaign to increase awareness and participation of opportunities in and outside of the school community led by various stakeholders as measured by increased social media likes or views on a monthly basis. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Community School Strategy: Needs based assessment of school community to target interventions according to academic, social, emotional, behavioral and family need  Weekly Success Meetings around improving attendance as we see a strong correlation between academic achievement and attendance  Family Intake to gage needs and offer supports to decrease barriers  Hire a community school coordinator to bridge resources and supports between the families, school and community Parent Involvement and Engagement Events around Instruction: Provide trainings that focus on the relationship between student/parent engagement and academic outcomes Read & Talk with Me Workshops biweekly to support reading and discussion Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Staff, CBO, Families September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Community School Director, CBO Supervisor, Parent Representative, Principal All Staff, CBO, Families September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Teachers, CBO consultants, Leadership 8 Family Fun Nights to model interactive reading and project based learning activities Instructional Fridays when families are welcomed to be a partner in the classroom Attendance Mentors supporting families Professional Learning and Supports for Staff: Professional Learning around the importance of parents as partners and ways to foster the relationship Parent led discussion around needs for their children and supports for themselves as well as exchange of ideas and knowledge to share with staff on a monthly basis All Staff, CBO, Families September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Parents Development and facilitation of the BGES TV Station as an alternative progressive approach to allow for families to gain access to school community events. All Stakeholders February 2019-June 2019 Principal, media arts teacher, selected students, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Partnership with Children Elite Learners Edible Schools Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustments will be made to support teacher/parent planning sessions for initiatives. The parent coordinator will have a flexible schedule to support parent with initiatives. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 9  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be an increase in family engagement via social media as evidenced by an increase in followers on social media applications, as well as a fully scheduled BGES Media Arts program made available to select BGES students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. -Attendance sheets -Parent Volunteer logs -Learning Environment Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) - NYS Exam Scores -Fountas & Pinnell benchmark reading levels -Performance-based assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) -Leveled Literacy Intervention System -Scholastic guided reading -Double Dose Fundations -Pre & Post On-demand writing pieces Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) -one to one -during the day -small group -before/after school -computer Mathematics Science *All students are part of a needs based 30 minute group each day -NYS Exam Scores Pre & Post Unit assessments -Exemplars performance tasks --Lesson embedded assessments and classroom observations -Lesson embedded assessments and classroom observations around acquired knowledge -strategy groups with a focus on a specific concepts/practices -small group -during the school day -before/after school -guided reading group during ELA in content area -small group -during the day 1 and application in project based tasks -reading and writing tasks within the content area --Lesson embedded assessments and classroom observations around acquired knowledge and application in project based tasks -reading and writing tasks within the content area -Partnership with Children CBO (Social Workers) -Guidance Counselor Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) -before/after school -guided reading group during ELA in content area -small group -during the day -before/after school -Small groups -during the day -one to one -Whole class -Social-emotional awareness groups -Self management groups -socialization groups -one to one counseling -whole class support 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 78 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The following services are provided through the school and a partnership with our CBO: -Uniforms -Backpacks and supplies -Housing assistance -Counseling Supports -Success Mentors to support attendance Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Administrative staff will regularly attend hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly qualified teachers for our school ● Our pupil personnel secretary will closely work with our Human Resources Director to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines ● Mentors will continue to provide a support to new and struggling teachers ● Teachers will be programmed based on their areas of expertise and licensing 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Summer Professional development facilitated by support staff, administration, and consultants for all staff ● Weekly lunch and learns ● District level support for principal ● Weekly school-wide professional learning ● Science consultant-City At Work ● School leaders and teacher peers support the development of teachers, including those new to the profession, with effective feedback and next steps from strategic use of short, frequent cycles of classroom observation and student work/data. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 5  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). ● Pre K social workers supports families with transitioning through workshops, one to one meetings, and assisting with registration at the school level ● Family Fun Tuesdays held once a month to involve the entire school community ● Pre-Kindergarten Foundation to the Common Core Learning Standards alignment with CCLS ● Portfolios are discussed with parents and shared with elementary school program 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The Assessment Team meets in the beginning of September to select school-wide assessments that support student learning and monitoring of progress across grade levels. Once school-wide measures have been selected, grades meet to select additional assessment measures that support instruction. The assessment team meets to ensure grade level decisions are aligned to the school-wide vision. The Professional Learning team meets to assess staff needs and interests for professional learning, including assessment. Grade teams meet weekly using protocols to analyze student work to make shared decisions around improving instruction. The Progress Monitoring Team analyzes assessment results to improve instruction on a weekly basis using data cycles. School leadership with meet with representatives from the Progress Monitoring team to gather a clear understanding bi-weekly to gather a clear understanding of result, trends, and implications for school-wide professional learning, supports, and instruction. 6  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A - Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 261,297 Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal 0 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,331,621 X X Parts 3, 4a Section 5C - Parts 3, 4a Section 5A - Parts 3, 4a Section 5C - Parts 3, 4a 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 7  to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Brooklyn Gardens Elementary, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Brooklyn Gardens Elementary will support parents and families of Title I students by: 9  ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 0  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Brooklyn Gardens Elementary, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 1  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 2  ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 3  ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? There are a number of ways in which the CS strategy is integrated into academic instruction at Brooklyn Gardens Elementary School (BGES). There are several ELT (Expanded Learning Time) programs that offer students additional assistance with ELA and math. ELT programs are also a vehicle the school uses to provide students the opportunity to express themselves and emote with classmates and school staff. Some examples of the ELT programs at BGES are Elite Learners, Inc., ArtsConnection, Little Flower Yoga, Girls Inc. and New Amsterdam Fencing. The CS strategy at BGES also includes Success Mentors; these Attendance Mentors connect with small groups of students and their families that have struggled with attendance. The Mentors are teachers, staff members, and sometimes parents. They not only support students in attending school more often, they also provide emotional support and follow up on academic progress. Success Mentors remind students that their presence in school is noticed and important in a personal way. Additionally, the CS strategy at BGES integrates increased art programming, experiences through trips, and multi-disciplinary content through our school garden project. Last, providing access to health and mental health services is part of the CS strategy at BGES. The lead CBO, Partnership with Children (PWC) provides on-site counseling services, a food pantry, and establishes and maintains strong partnerships with providers like Visiting Nurse Services Children’s Mobile Crisis Team, NY Psychotherapy and Counseling Center, and BMS in order to increase student and family access and follow-through at medical appointments. PWC, in collaboration with the Department of Education Office of Community Schools also organizes events to provide students with access to vision and dental screenings. All of these services are intended to help increase student attendance and student and family engagement in the school community. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. 1. By June 2019, Brooklyn Gardens Elementary School (BGES) will provide workshops and opportunities to families through partnerships with the CBO (Partnership with Children), and other organizations, to increase parent involvement and collaboration focused on increasing literacy performance by at least 10%. a. BGES and New York Library (East New York branch) will continue to develop a partnership. The results from this partnership will be:  Knowledge of various genres of books  Workshops emphasizing the importance of reading with children b. Administration and CSD will develop a specific Parent-Teacher strategy, that will make use of family engagement time and connecting it to student learning. Specifically focusing on literacy and mathematics the results from this will be:  Targeted students will be on grade level as measured by school wide interim assessments 5   Parents will be provided with the tools and skills needed to continue you learning at home with their student, throughtthrough the use of parent teacher teams 2. By June 2019, end of the year cumulative attendance will be 92%. This will happen through: a.Consistent Success Mentorship (daily personal phone calls to all absent students including chronically absent students, weekly/monthly incentives based on improvements in attendance) b.Attendance Incentives (themed days, raffles, giveaways) c.Improved parent involvement (home visits, robo calls, working closely with surrounding shelters in the area) d. Setting targeted daily attendance goal for the % of students needed to meet end of year cumulative attendance goal 3. By the end of June 2019, 100% of students would have participated in expanded learning activities that increase access to both culture and arts. This will happen through partnerships with culture and arts organizations such as: a. Arts East New York b. Little Flower Yoga c. New Amsterdam Fencing d. Service Learning Project Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Achieving our Community School Goals in the aforementioned areas will support our academic goal of increasing our students' literacy and mathematics performance by 10% through providing students and families with the opportunity to engage with the school and provide support in areas that have proved to be a challenge for our population. Taking a holistic approach to address all the internal areas of need through programs provided by Partnership with Children, New York Psychotherapy, New York Cares (Homework Help, Read Alouds, Math Games), Elite Learners, Inc., in combination with, Success Mentorship and community partnerships, students will be better able to focus on academic achievement. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Elite Learners, Inc. Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal 20 Female and Male Students Weekly By June 2019, students will develop leadership skills through their association with artistic 6  Partnership with Children PK-5 Partnership with Children PK-5 Counseling (1:1, small group), Full Classroom Interventions, Crisis Interventions, Full Staff PD Success Mentor Program Little Flower Yoga 3rd grade students. Yoga and mindfulness classes Partnership with Children PK-5th grade Morning Greetings-Offering the option of Coffee or Tea in the morning during arrival mentors. Students will also learn new skills,develop their creativity, and make connections to internal capabilities which will lead to self-sufficiency. Please see Office of School Heath Mental Health Work Plan By June 2019, Success mentors will assist our chronically absent students with their attendance and school participation. This will be completed through individualized planning and collaboration with the student and their family, daily phone calls and check-ins, and weekly attendance meetings. By June 2019, students will gain tools of yoga and mindfulness offer proven methods of managing physical, mental and emotional stress. Students’ will increase their capacity to learn effectively, manage their emotions, regulate their own behavior, and achieve personal and academic success. By June 2019, students and families will feel more comfortable coming into the school due to friendly greetings at the door when escorting their students into the school building. 7  New York Cares 1st-5th grade New York Cares will provide Partnership with Children PK-5th grade Community School Forum Studio in a School K-5TH grade Weekly art enrichment activities Partnership with Children PK-5th grade Family Fun Night Partnership with Children PK-5th grade Community School Team; School Leadership Team meetings Partnership with Children PK-5th grade Family engagement days NY Cares will provide weekly homework help to small groups of students in need, as well as provide weekly Saturday programming in Martial Arts and Photography By May 2019, over 250 families will meet with CBOs, non-profit organizations and city agencies to learn about services. They will also engage with school staff and administration to discuss what they feel BGES and their surrounding community needs. By June 2019, students will learn how to redirect their frustration and anger through artistic expression. By June 2019, family fun nights will have been scheduled and over 15 families will have attended each event for the opportunity to meet with school staff, receive important information about the school and community, and discuss their child's academic success and needs. By June 2019, community members and parents will be able to voice their opinions on the school year and/or any improvements needed for the next school year. By June 2019, 15 or more families, monthly, will be able meet with teachers and staff to discuss their. By June 8  Smile New York PK-5th grade Dental screening and dissemination of dental supplies Warby Parker/DOH PK-5th grade Vision screening and eye-glasses 2019, 15 or more families, monthly, will be able meet with teachers and staff to discuss their students’ successes and areas of improvement. By June 2018, Smile NY will meet with every student to assess their dental health and needs. By June 2019, DOH/Warby Parker will provide vision screening to 100% of BGES students and provide glasses to those in need. New York Psychotherapy PK-5th grade Parent Workshops NYPCC will provide 4 parent workshops during the 2018-19 school year with the goal of destigmatizing mental health needs/services and providing caregivers with support. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The CBO at Brooklyn Gardens Elementary School, Partnership with Children, provides our community school with a dedicated Community School Director. The role of the Community School Director is to act as a coordinator at the school level. The CSD facilitates alliances and partnerships with City agencies and other organizations to establish a continuum of services that are aligned with school goals and needs. The CSD also organizes assets and needs assessments, works with the Parent Coordinator to ensure that families have meaningful engagement opportunities, and works with school leadership to identify high-need students, coordinate with teachers and staff to target interventions, and track and monitor the impact of interventions. Additionally, our lead CBO, Partnership with Children (PWC) provides trauma-informed counseling, school-wide services, and family and community outreach. PWC does this through crisis intervention and de-escalation, individual weekly, bi-weekly, or monthly counseling, small group counseling, and full classroom interventions. PWC staff also provides home visits and referrals to outside resources for families who need more intensive services. Last, PWC works with teachers directly to provide professional development, coaching and support. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 9  Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 1. The CBO at Brooklyn Gardens Elementary School, Partnership with Children, provides our community school with a dedicated Community School Director. The role of the Community School Director is to act as a coordinator at the school level. The CSD facilitates alliances and partnerships with City agencies and other organizations to establish a continuum of services that are aligned with school goals and needs. The CSD also organizes assets and needs assessments, works with the Parent Coordinator to ensure that families have meaningful engagement opportunities, and works with school leadership to identify high-need students, coordinate with teachers and staff to target interventions, and track and monitor the impact of interventions. Additionally, our lead CBO, Partnership with Children (PWC) provides trauma-informed counseling, school-wide services, and family and community outreach. PWC does this through crisis intervention and de-escalation, individual weekly, bi-weekly, or monthly counseling, small group counseling, and full classroom interventions. PWC staff also provides home visits and referrals to outside resources for families who need more intensive services. Last, PWC works with teachers directly to provide professional development, coaching and support. 2. The school’s extended learning programs are customized to meet all students’ needs with engaging programming that targets both academic skills and social and emotional development. Student participation in multiple programs is encouraged as each is offered on different days and/or at different times. Parents are encouraged to have their child(ren) participate in extended learning activities. Our programs include individual as well as group activities. Our garden, yoga, photography, martial arts, and visual arts programs encourage interaction between students and their environments. They also help students develop their thinking skills and strategies to make better decisions for themselves and the members of their groups and teams. PWC individual counseling and counseling in small groups may be implemented to address the link between social emotional health, healthy choices, and positive behavioral outcomes. The behaviorist framework of PWC's counseling interventions emphasizes ascertaining the root causes of challenging behavior, teaching replacement behaviors, and 0  providing consistent feedback to students to analyze setbacks and reward successes in behavioral change. All counseling groups adhere to the goal of decreasing the number of behavioral incidents among students to increase time on task in the classroom toward academic success. Students are guided in how to replace negative coping skills with positive coping skills; pro-social behaviors are reinforced in a group setting that prioritizes mutual respect, responsibility, and team building. The CSD, teachers, and school leadership together will discuss students’ needs. Teachers and school staff will be made aware of the services and programs available to students. For most programming (wellness, ELT and several OST programs), students will be selected to participate in the program offered as a response to individual and family needs. The representative in charge of each program will pick up and drop off students to the program and back to their classroom. The program manager will be in close communication with the CSD, teacher and other supporting school staff in order to continuously evaluate student fit in each program. 3.Families are part of the different systems and structures which exist in the school. Parents are part of the CST/SLT, PTA, and school volunteer group. Parents outside of these teams have access on a daily basis to administration and their children’s teachers. Teachers are actively engaged in working with parents to make them aware of their student’s data both formally and informally. During regularly scheduled parent workshops, parents are exposed to curriculum materials as well as to all pertinent data regarding student progress. The primary language in the building is English; however there are Spanish and Haitian Creole interpreters at each parent event. In order to encourage parent/child participation in activities as families we have monthly Family Fun Nights that include milk & cookies night (a holiday season favorite!), movie night, and literacy night. Workshops for parents are both geared towards academics as well as social/emotional health. Workshops are provided for parents on both weekdays and evenings/after school. Past workshops have included mental health awareness, Common Core Learning Standards for ELA/Math, the importance of great attendance, promotional criteria, and family nutrition. Additionally, families are welcomed and made a part of the school community by being able to participate in different events. Each month there is a Family Fun Night and CST/SLT Meetings are posted on the School Calendar that is sent home so any parent may come and be involved in the various school events, as well as have an opportunity to share their feedback and voice their opinions. The CBO in our building, Partnership with Children, assists us with fulfilling our vision through hosting events such as a School Kick-Off in the fall and a Community Forum in the spring in order to get to know our families and their needs. Partnership with Children shares an office with the Parent Coordinator so there is a specific place parents, teachers, and staff can go for help. Partnership with Children also provides workshops for parents and teachers as well as special programs for our students such Student Government and Attendance Events. 4. The Community School Director will implement and support all attendance initiatives by:  Using the New Visions Data Sorter to identify attendance patterns and strategize action plans to move forward. In addition, we are able to compare the current year's attendance trends with the history of attendance trends from previous years o Using our New Visions Attendance Heat Map to manage the Success Mentor Initiative - we have a central location where we can create groups and have various members from the team oversee a group and check in with those students and families to ensure consistent attendance Increasing attendance, by organizing daily phone calls for children who are absent   Daily shout-outs for classrooms with 100% attendance   Organizing incentives for parents of children who come to school every day, to support them  Ensuring that accurate data systems are kept Shout-out for staff attendance that is 100% 1  o Strengthening practices, reinforcing protocols and procedures for record keeping o During our September PD day, reviewing in detail, attendance and lateness process o Revisiting PD throughout the year to continue to support teachers in monitoring the monthly attendance  Organizing visits to Family Shelters to work more closely with Shelter Liaisons to assist families in temporary housing in getting their students to school more frequently Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Three areas of focus: Increased Student Literacy 1. 2. Housing Placement (Homebase services, Single stop) 3. Attendance Improvement Expanded Learning Time: Contracting with a CBO provider of after-school services to offer various programs dedicated to meet the social, emotional, physical and academic needs of students after school hours (tutoring, martial arts, photography, step, basketball, visual arts, performing arts). Also contract with CBO providers of enrichment and integrated learning activities during school hours (yoga, music, book club). # of Students/Timeframe served: 65/semester Goal for SY 2017-2018: Development of emotional and social skills necessary for academic success Success Mentoring: Mentors connect with a small cohort of students that have struggled with attendance in the prior year. # of students/time frame served: 80-100/year Goals for SY 2017-2018: Increased student engagement and attendance that leads to academic improvement 2  Health Services: Smile NY, Brightpoint Health, BMS will establish and maintain strong partnerships to increase student and family access to and follow-through on appointments. # of students/timeframe served: 40-80 students served/year Goals for 2017-18 SY: Increased health of all students and knowledge of health resources in the surrounding community leading to improved attendance and academic achievement Mental Health: Partnership with Children provides school-based integrated student support services Service Description: Partnership with Children (PWC) provides trauma-informed counseling, school-wide services, and family and community outreach. PWC does this through crisis intervention and de-escalation, individual weekly, bi-weekly, or monthly counseling, small group counseling, and full classroom interventions. PWC staff also provides home visits and referrals to outside resources for families who need more intensive services. Last, PWC works with teachers directly to provide professional development, coaching and support on classroom management # of students/Timeframe served: 125/year Goals for SY 2017-18: Addressing social service, health and mental health needs of students and their families in order to help students arrive and remain at school ready to learn Partners Supporting ELT (Expanded Learning Time): Girls, Inc. Elite Learners, Inc. Young Voices, Big Sounds Reading Academy 3  Studio in a School New York Cares Members of the Community School Team: Irene Spence, Principal Ciani Espada, Assistant Principal Naisha Blijd, CSD Afton Vermeer, PWC Social Work Director Zahira Torres, BGES Parent Coordinator Rebekah Schubert, BGES Speech Pathologist Keith Logan, Parent CST Meetings will be organized bi-weekly to discuss trends and patterns of attendance, levels of family engagement, new programs or activities occurring, needs of the student body and the suitable programming for it. The CSD and School Leadership Team will discuss in depth the attendance trends throughout the school year. We will also discuss our chronically absent students and strategize solutions. Attendance data will be collected from the school secretary on a daily basis by 9:30am. Once it is collected, Success Mentors and the Community School Director will contact the families to discuss reasons why students are absent. This outreach will also serve as a last attempt to get the student to school. Key Partnership with Children Staff: Community School Director: Naisha Blijd Roles and Responsibilities: *Collaborate with key stakeholders (students, families, school staff and community members) to develop a needs assessment, to create and implement a community school plan *Develop and lead a Community School Team of stakeholders to implement the plan and monitor progress *Create and implement a robust parent and community engagement action plan *Communicate and build relationships with community partners, key-stakeholders, and volunteers *Form partnerships with community agencies aligned with school goals, and bring services into the school (i.e. health, mental health, dental, after school, GED, arts etc.) for students and parents 4  *Provide oversight and coordination of programming during the school day and Expanded day hours for students, families and the community *Track program activity and progress and use data and evaluation to strengthen the program Social Work Director: Afton Vermeer Roles and Responsibilities: *Providing individual counseling and case management *Facilitating large and small group counseling *Attend all school-based meetings (e.g. with administration, teachers, support staff) *Collaborating with school administration and staff on needs of students, families and school community *Integrating into and engaging with school culture through development of positive relationships with school community *Conducting parent workshops and teacher staff development sessions *Conducting home visits *Supporting students and families in crisis *Conducting weekly structured supervision of PWC social worker and graduate level interns *Conducting weekly staff meetings *Ensuring all case notes, bio psycho-socials and goal plans are completed and of high quality *Ensuring data collection is timely and accurate Social Worker: Jayme Hersh Roles and Responsibilities: *Providing individual counseling and case management *Facilitating large and small group counseling (individually or with co-facilitator) *Collaborating with school administration and staff on needs of students, families and school community *Integrating into and engaging with school culture through development of positive relationships with school community 5  *Conducting home visits *Supporting students and families in crisis *Supervising MSW intern *Other duties as assigned Family Outreach Worker: Aida Rondon Roles and Responsibilities: *Conduct home visits *Attend Attendance Team Meetings *Act as an Attendance Mentor to a caseload of students *Support caregivers in overcoming obstacles to bringing their children to school *Track attendance data and progress Program Director: Meredith Sherman Roles and Responsibilities: *Provide weekly supervision to Community School Director and Family Outreach Worker *Collaborate with school leadership to implement Community School strategies and continuously evaluate school and community needs and resources *Support Community School Director in developing partnerships with community-based organizations *Manage budget *Track program activity and progress and use data and evaluation to strengthen the program. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. New Visions Data Sorter and Attendance Heat Map support/continuous learning opportunities, OCS training on Success Mentor program and implementation, custodial assistance, permits for numerous OST activities, office/program supplies (paper, chart paper, toner, etc.) Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Attendance Program: Implementation date- 9/1/2018 6  Completion date- 6/30/2019 ELT Programs: Implementation date- gathering resources, completing MOUs/subcontracts- 7/1/2017; programs start- 10/1/2017 Completion date- 6/15/2018 Health/Wellness Programs: Implementation date- 9/1/2018 Completion date- 6/30/2019 Family Engagement Programs: Implementation date- gathering resources, creating action plans- 7/1/2018 programs start- 8/28/2018 Completion date- 6/30/2019 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Brooklyn District 19 School Name Brooklyn Gardens Elementary School School Number 557 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Irene Spence Coach - ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Nicole Cafaro Teacher/Subject Area Johanna Amancio Teacher/Subject Area Francheska Cepeda Related-Service Provider Rebekha Schubert Superintendent Thomas McBryde Jr. Assistant Principal Ciani Espada Coach - School Counselor Melissa Venable Parent Charlene Dumas Parent Coordinator Zahira Torres Field Support Center Staff Member - Other (Name and Title) - C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 320 8 Total number of ELLs 19 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.94%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 0 K 0 3 0 4 0 1 0 2 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Brooklyn Gardens will use teacher created assessments, student work, the Fountas & Pinnell Program, data provided by MYON, and other sources to evaluate each students reading level and comprehension ability. In addition, teachers use pre and post lieracy assessments to evaluate comprehension and reading levels of students. This data will continue to drive differentiated instruction and help determine independent and guided reading levels. It will help tailor individual learning plans , allow progress monitoring, and provide opportunity to adjust curriculum based on ELL students needs 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? BGES follows a schedule each school year in order to ensure assessments are completed at a pace that is conducive to effective analysis. Student scores and performance levels are gathered and made available through our schoolwide assessment data hub. Various assessments are administered by classroom teachers and assessment teams throughout the 9  year. Deadlines are included on the calendar to make certain this data is immediately made available to all staff in order to be used for planning and designing instruction based on students needs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our ELLs complete the appropriate grade level New York City Periodic Assessment annually. This assessment is designed to inform educators with specific data about their students strengths and needs in English language development. Student responses are put into the data tracking system to monitor progress. Our ENL team uses the results of this assessment to guide us in planning individual, small group, and class instruction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? In addition to the assessment schedule and schoolwide data hub (Google Drive), Brooklyn Gardens has an English as a New Language team whose goal is to identify and target student needs. One task the team has is to examine and evaluate our summative data and derives a plan to address academic and language based needs of students. They use a manual data tracking system, a goal tracker, review conference notes and teacher created assessments. These professionals work congruently to design individualized action plans for students in the classroom setting as well as in the pull-out ENL setting. By working cooperatively, our teachers design a plan to address interventions based on the summative data to effectively increase student achievement. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Using the Standard Treatment Protocol, we will continue to consider; -Students number of years in ENL program (newcomer or long term) -English and home language literacy -SIFE indications -Classroom or ENL teacher recommendations -Parent or guardian request -Sample of student work in English and L1 if possible -Bilingual education evaluation, is a disability is suspected -and data produced by F&P, SOLOM, NYSESLAT/NYSITELL NYS Periodic Assessments and regular assessments. This protocol is supported by a strong research base. After carefully analyzing this data, students will be provided with support in the appropriate RTI tiers. For students in Tier 1, Teachers will adjust the curriculum and create scaffolds to support ELLs in the classroom.For Tier 2, Students will be in small groups with a classroom teacher in the classroom setting. For our Tier 3 students, intense pull out instruction is given by the ENL teacher or our Academic Educational Liaison from our CARE team for Tier 3. The CARE team meets weekly focusing on academics as well as social-emotional development. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT reveals different areas of student success, and also areas in need of improvement. We have 3 students at the ENTERING level, 6 students at the EMERGING level, 4 students at the TRANSITIONING level, and 10 students at the EXPANDING level. Additionally, we currently have 1 student at the COMMANDING level. This data allows for creation of subgroups of students for targeted, specific programs to help students have successful academic outcomes. Students overall and breakdown NYSESLAT scores help us examine our program and plans, and inform us which areas need to be addressed as a focus of learning (Speaking, listening, reading and writing). Additionally, results of ELA and Math scores are evaluated by ENL and school assessment team to identify specific academic needs of students for instructional targets 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In addition to our ENL teacher obtaining a current ATS report of enrolled students on a weekly basis, our school secretary notifies the ENL department immediately when there are new students enrolling in the building. Therefore, current students, transferring students, and students that are new to NYC are provided with the appropriate levels of instruction and 0  individualized support in ENL. In addition, new enrollees are reported to the CARE team which is comprised of Principal, Assistant Principal, related service providers such as social worker, guidance counselor, and school psychologist. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. As per CR Part 154.2, we provide standalone and integrated minutes of instruction based on students level of proficiency and level. Integrated ENL will be delivered by co-teaching by our ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher. Our ENL educator works closely with the classroom teachers and service providers to develop the most effective plan for students while pushing in and pulling groups. Depending on needs of students, groups are formed and may be flexible throughout the year, especially as students grow academically and in their proficiency. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our ENL pedagogue creates a schoolwide ENL schedule to ensure all ENL students are serviced most appropriately and effectively. Schedule is designed for each student considering proficency levels, lunch period, times of core subjects scheduled, and times of related services. The new CR154-2 chart is also used to ensure each level is receiving the appropriate number of standalone and integrated minutes. Ie: Entering students will receive the same 360 minutes, however 180 minutes will be stand alone ENL, and 180 minutes will be integrated ENL. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ENL teacher regularly participates with the Brooklyn North FSC Professional Development. Through these Study groups and workshops, we have been provided with strategies and methods to improve instruction for ELLs, making learning more successful and content comprehensible for ELLs. One strategy we explored was the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol ( SIOP ) model for instruction. This is a strategy for teachers to use to help make subject matter concepts understandable for students who are still developing English language skills. The ENL and classroom teacher work together to deliver instruction with content objectives and simultaneously incorporate a language objective to further build English language proficiency. The content objective tells what students will learn during the lesson, and the language objective tells how the student will learn and/or demonstrate their mastery of the lesson by reading, speaking, writing, or listening. Based on the assessment of students academic needs, this may be delivered to the entire class, push in or pull out while developed in small group instruction. SIOP has been proven to be beneficial to all learners. Having both content and learning objectives clearly stated and clearly posted, help set students up for success in mastering the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 1  Currently our school population includes ELLs with a home language of Spanish. For our newcomers, we regularly give assessments in the students home language. We are fortunate to have any native Spanish speaking staff members enabling us to have regular conversations and oral assessments one on one with our ELLs. We may interview the students in the HL to discuss classroom learning, skills, and discuss books read together in Spanish. Many of these students have their English language proficiency of a beginner, but have the academic skills and knowledge for grade level math, social studies and more. We assess with home language book reports, peer conversations, student writing and opportunities to explain their thinking processes in their HL. In addition, students are provided with assessments, including the NYS assessment in math and science, in English as well as in their HL. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. Currently, we do not have any SIFE students. However, an individualized instructional plan for future SIFE students will receive the mandated amount of ENL instructional minutes as per CR Part 154, according to proficiency level. Their instruction will be differentiated based on their specific knowledge and needs.B. Newcomer students are often serviced in small groups with children from mixed level groups until they have acquired basic inter-communication skills (BICS). Using the SOLOM measuring tool, newcomers are frequently informally assessed in their speaking and listening skill in order to begin instruction to improve their BICS and later CALPS. Newcomers also often need to build foundational knowledge in phonics. C. Developing students instruction is driven by various assessments to determine and build upon student levels. Strengths and needs are identified and instruction is developed accordingly. Students are given language objectives through content area learning.D. Long Term ELLs are given assessments to determine which specific areas of English language the student needs to develop. By targeting the areas they need assistance in, we can help these students reach proficiency. E. ENL teacher works with closely with classroom teacher to identify English proficiency skills of these students which may still need intervention. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We currently have ELL-SWDs in Self-Contained (12:1) and Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ICT) classrooms. All students are serviced by an ENL teacher with standalone ENL and integrated instruction, using the push-in and pull-out approaches. Universal Design for Learning (UDL) principals will serve as a guide to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English Language Development. This method will give each student meaningful access to the curriculum by assuring access to the environment as well as multiple means of representation, expression, and engagement. The following principles should support English language Development for ELL-SWDS:1. inclusiveness- a classroom climate that communicates respect 2. physical space- equipment, resources and materials provide access for participation, a little physical effort in obtaining3. delivery methods- content is delivered and presented in multiple modes4. information access- use of captions videos, accessible electronic formats and printed work5. interaction- accessible to everyone, use of multiple ways for students to participate6. feedback- effective prompting during activity and constructive comments for all student work completed7. demonstration of knowledge- provisions for multiple ways to demonstrate student work: group work, portfolios, demonstrations, and presentations. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We use flexibility for our ELL-SWDs. Some students regularly attend lessons in other classrooms in some subject areas, as well as receive support in small groups to progress to proficiency. This flexibility gives our students the individualized and differentiated support they need, while providing them with the least restrictive environment for learning. 2  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Based on the students needs, various interventions are provided to best accommodate these learners. For students that need to develop and strengthen phonics skills, they will receive support in Fundations and The Wilson Reading Program. For students that need to grow in comprehension, lessons will be targeted accordingly. For students that need support in math, instruction will be provided to target academic math vocabulary to be applied to lessons and student work. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? With more flexible programming and specific targeted instruction for next year, we will assist our students reach their academic goals. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There will be no discontinuation of any programs or services next year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs including after school and supplemental services. Any before or after school programs, as well as other programs will be available to ELLs. Notification will be sent home in the families preferred language to inform about such programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Brooklyn Gardens uses MYON, Mathletics, Grammar Workshop, Words their Way, Go Math, and Ready Gen and teacher created materials. Based on students needs, a variety of different materials are used. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our ENL model, students are offered assessments on a classroom level and state level in their home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Each of our classrooms with ELLs are equipped with age appropriate grade level books and resources. For classrooms in need of appropriate books, we supply them. For example, our Entering and Emerging 2nd or 3rd graders are not using big books or picture books, but are presented with information in a way that will build English proficiency while is grade appropriate in content. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We share a building with IS 663 School of the Future Brooklyn. Our ENL teacher bases our scheduling for ELLs in both schools on students academic, linguistic and socio-emotional needs. Core subjects, related service, and other schedule components are all considered when creating each individual students ENL plan. Staff members work together to collectively provide the best possible strategies to ensure all students needs are met. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In order to help ELLs and their families become acclimated to our school, these new students are given an orientation and a tour of our school. If possible, they will meet their new teacher before the year begins (or before their 1 st day for enrollment mid year) . Furthermore, students families that enroll for the beginning of the school year are invited to our "Schoolyear Kickoff Barbecue" to familiarize students and families to staff an fellow students, make connections, learn about resources and opportunities in the school and community, and get excited for a great new school year!! 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 3  We do not currently offer any language electives at PS557. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ELL personnel at PS557 attend the congruent PD as general staff in addition to targeted training in NYSESLAT, ELL content and/or updates, NYSITELL, compliance, LAP/LTI and more. Classroom teachers that work with ELLs will be provided with PD to improve their practices for ELLs. All ELL related information, practices and updates will be turn-keyed to all staff that work with our ELLs. The ENL teachers at Brooklyn Gardens receive equal support as classroom teachers as they engage in the CCLS . When targeted training and support are offered, our ELL teachers will attend to further improve practices as they progress and/or change. All ELL related information, practices and updates will be turn-keyed to all staff that work with our Ells. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. PS557 provides various professional development to all teachers including those that specifically addresses the needs of English Language Learners. Our schoolwide PDs include a 15% minimum for all teachers dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Additionally, our ENL teacher will attend various PD to reach the required number of hours, and turnkey learned information to staff. Through P-Weekly and email blasts, we will be kept aware of PD opportunities. Our school secretary keeps records of PD attended inside and outside the building. Sign in sheets are kept on file Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Annual individual meetings are scheduled with families/parents of ELLs through the ENL teacher and parent coordinator. They are scheduled to accommodate the parent's availability in the early am, after school, or at a time more conducive to hem. We are fortunate that our parent coordinator speaks Spanish, as well as many other staff members, allowing translation on demand for annual meetings. The meetings are held in September and October to inform parents of the student goals for the year ahead. Students program goals, language development progress, assessment results including proficiency levels, and language needs are reviewed and discussed. For example, specific samples of student work and individual assessment results are reviewed with parents at the annual meetings. The fur domains of language acquisition are discussed: listening, speaking, 4  reading, and writing. We meet again with parents in May, June of the academic year to review the year's progress, goals th have been met, and next steps. Student work samples and data drive the discussion.S 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental involvement is encouraged to ALL our families, including families of ELLs. School and after-school events are open to all, and families of ELLs are sent a translated invite or flier informing them of the event(s). For example, we have various events showcasing our students work throughout the year, we send a notice to parents in their home language. Our ELL families are invited and encouraged to attend our Family Fun Nights. We also encourage them in our initial registration and meetings to be a part of the school community, and to attend these events. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Irene Spence, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Brooklyn Gardens Elementary School DBN: 19k557 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Irene Spence Title Principal Ciani Espada Assistant Principal Zahiira Torres Parent Coordinator Nicole Cafaro ENL/Bilingual Teacher Charlene Dumas Parent Johanna Amancio Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/26/17 6/26/17 6/26/17 6/26/17 6/26/17 6/26/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 19K School Name: Brooklyn Gardens Elementary School Superintendent: Thomas McBryde Jr. The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Nicole Zahira Cafaro Torres ENL Teacher Parent Coordinator Yes No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The ATS report of preferred languages, additional registration enrollment data, Student Emergency Contact cards, HLIS form (specifically Part 3 -parent information and contact language survey) and additional NYCDOE Language of Communication survey for our ELLs shows our population prefers their oral and written communication in English. The majority of our ELLs come from homes in which Spanish is spoken. Other students in our school have a home language of Bengali, MB and French Creole. In order to monitor parent choice of communication, we will create a running report in the ENL department of the ways parents and families wish to be notified via mail or spoken language. This report will be referenced monthly in order to provide needs to the community. 8  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Spanish French Creole English Written Preferred Spanish French and French Creole English N N N Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish N French & French Creole N English N 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families  Welcome Back Letters  Annual handbooks  September/ 1x per yr  Hopes and Dreams Event (Sept.)  Parent Teacher Conferences September, November, March, May     Individual parent Conferences regarding student progress IEP meetings Family Fun Nights Field Trips Various frequency determined as each event is planned or occurrence takes place Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Depending on the language required: LAC In house translation    The Big Word  NYC translation services Depending on the language required: LAC In house translation    The Big Word  NYC translation services Depending on the language required: LAC In house translation    The Big Word 9  Special events and workshops   Extra-curricular activities  Special community or unforeseen occurrences notices calendars   newsletters monthly  School Closure (Holidays and Recess Closures) As determined by the NYC DOE School Calendar  State test schedules As determined by the NYS / NYC DOE assessment calendars  NYC translation services Depending on the language required: LAC In house translation    The Big Word  NYC translation services Depending on the language required: LAC In house translation    The Big Word  NYC translation services Depending on the language required: LAC In house translation    The Big Word  NYC translation services 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide  Annual ELL meetings May and June  Back to School Night/ Hopes and Dreams Event (Sept.)  Parent Teacher Conferences September, November, March, May interpretation service(s)? Prearranged by LAC utilizing one of the following services:  Staff member fluent in required language  Bilingual family member or selected individual by family  NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Prearranged by LAC utilizing one of the following services:  Staff member fluent in required language 0     Family Fun Nights Individual parent Conferences regarding student progress IEP meetings Various frequency determined as each event is planned  Special events and workshops Various frequency determined as each event is planned  Bilingual family member or selected individual by family  NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Prearranged by LAC utilizing one of the following services:  Staff member fluent in required language  Bilingual family member or selected individual by family  NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Prearranged by LAC utilizing one of the following services:  Staff member fluent in required language  Bilingual family member or selected individual by family  NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Prearranged by LAC utilizing one of the following services: Staff member fluent in required language   Bilingual family member or selected individual by family  NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff are provided with the information needed to access to all Chancellor's Regulations on the 1st day of school and are required to review the regulations, as is evidenced by signed proof of receipt by each staff member. In addition, our school has the Welcome Poster easily accessible in our entrance way to the school and in the Main Office. This poster informs families that we can assist them in their native language. The language ID card is available in the main office. We also have the Translation and Interpretation Unit informational brochures available for parents 1  and families to explain the service available, and how to access it. The parents bill of rights is given to parents at the time they come in regarding registration. It is provided in their home language , via the DOE website, at http://schools.nyc.gov/RulesPolicies/ParentBillofRights/default.htm Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school has the Welcome Poster easily accessible in our entrance way to the school and in the Main Office. This poster informs families that we can assist them in their native language. The language ID card is available in the main office. We also have the Translation and Interpretation Unit informational brochures available for parents and families to explain the service available, and how to access it. The parents bill of rights is given to parents at the time they come in regarding registration. It is provided in their home language , via the DOE website, at http://schools.nyc.gov/RulesPolicies/ParentBillofRights/default.htm Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will create a language friendly short survey to be completed at annual ELL appointments. Families will be encouraged to complete any surveys in their native language, which our LAC will then have translated to English, when necessary. This survey will provide data from limited-English-proficient parents on the language services they receive. It will tell us how our school was successful and if any areas need improvement. Our LAC and team will review this data to make any necessary or additional components need to be in place to ensure that we are properly communicating to our speakers of other languages. 2 
