 21K559 School Name: LIFE ACADEMY HIGH SCHOOL FOR FILM AND MUSIC Principal: EUGENIA KELCH   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 332100011559 9 - 12 2630 Benson Ave 718-333-7750 Section 1: School Information Page School Information LIFE Academy High School for Film and Music School Number (DBN): 21K559 718-333-7775 Fax: Phone Number: Salome Soocka ssoocka@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Eugenia Kelch SeelochanieRam Teresa Ford Betsy Benedith Teresa Ford ArianaMorgan Tiffany Ford N/A District Information Geographical District: 21 Superintendent’s Office Address: Michael Prayor Superintendent: 1830 Shore Blvd, Rm F11 Brooklyn, NY 11235 mprayor@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718368-8515 Phone Number: 7183688517 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn South Mauriciere de Govia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89th Street mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 7187594862 Phone Number: Fax: N/A   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Eugenia Kelch SeelochanieRam Teresa Ford Lynette Edwards Teresa Ford Ariana Morgan Tiffany Ford N/A Dileck Mergin Christine Poblete Janet Johnson *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Recording Secretary Parent Treasurer   Betsy Benedith Salome Soocka PharaVincent Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Assistant Principal Secretary Member/UFT Member/Student Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview L.I.F.E. (Learning by Integrating Film in Education) is a small, safe, college preparatory environment where students pursue their learning in an atmosphere supported by the entire school community. This year we will focus on the integration of film and academics. Our goal is for L.I.F.E. Academy students to develop creative and technical skills to prepare them for college and career endeavors. Teachers emphasize inquiry, project and performance based   assessments to engage the whole child. Students are encouraged to think critically, develop their unique talents and give back generously to the community. Our vision and mission was formed by the staff in June 2012 and reflects our commitment to ensure our students graduate college and career ready. During the 2018-2019 school year LIFE Academy staff, students and parents will revisit our schools mission and vision statements to create revisions reflective of changing times and expressed present population needs. LIFE Academy has developed interdisciplinary grade teams and department common planning to incorporate specific elements of our mission statement. These elements are evident through -Interdisciplinary collaborations resulting in writing tasks aligning content in each subject area -Opportunities for students to creatively frame their understanding of the world through analysis of multiple perspectives -Various means of student (academic, social, emotional) support through grade team mentor groups, KidTalk inquiry, Cohort data team, SNAP (Students Needing Academic Plans) and Clinic Plus For the 2018 - 2019 school year, we will continue developing our commitment and efforts to ensuring our students receive rigorous instruction, access to Advanced Placement/College level courses and opportunities to engage in college and career experiences in film and music. The 2018 - 2019 Instructional Focus is as follows: -Assessment, specifically customizing instruction based on qualitative, quantitative, formative and summative data analysis results. -Engaging students through structured student led discussions and writing with purpose developing language and vocabulary to translate into the development of writing pieces. Our school wide initiative is interdisciplinary collaboration specifically the inclusion of film and music into core content areas of ELA and social studies. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. LIFE Academy HS for Film and Music serves grades 9-12 and is housed on a shared space within the Lafayette Educational Campus. This year the 9th grade team will utilize the AVID program as a means to embed college preparation and instructional supports to engage students in the initial exploration of college. Our strategic partnerships with Brooklyn College, Kingsborough Community College, Liberty Partnerships, College Spring and Long Island University provides access and exposure to support student progress and develop structured feedback to improve student progress outcomes. As of this year, we have instituted monthly cohort team meetings to assess student needs and progress. Additionally, daily grade level and department teams focused common planning time has been maintained for teachers to collaborate on the implementation of inter-disciplinary tasks and assessments as well as the development of authentic tasks. It is our belief that a focus on grade teams will provide the opportunity for 0  teachers, staff and administrators to better address the needs of cohorts of students while creating a culture of support, trust and collaboration between students and teachers. Additionally, we have formed partnerships with programs such as Liberty Partnership, College Spring and Tried & True tutoring to build a college going, college ready culture within the school. Our student population consists of General education, Special Education and English Language Learners. This year all students will be supported based on their specific, identified needs through Common Core Learning Standards Folders which includes a prioritized set of key standards chosen and focused according to demonstrated abilities in class and school based assessments which will lead to customization of instruction. Additionally, the instructional cabinet development of the folder system actively engages students in their academic development. As a result, students are provided with feedback on targeted skill development and offered ongoing opportunities to reflect, revise and self-assess demonstrations of their learning. This process is supported through multiple scheduled teacher-student goal setting conferences aligned with the marking periods. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our student population consists of General education, Special Education and English Language Learners. All students are supported based on their specific needs through Common Core Learning Standards Folders which includes a prioritized set of key standards chosen and focused on by the school community. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element in the Framework for Great Schools in which LIFE has made the most progress over the past year is Rigorous Instruction. Curricula has undergone frequent revisions to ensure that units and lessons demonstrate acquisition of higher order thinking, self/peer reflection, application of new learning, progressive skill development and maximized instructional time through the elimination of overlaps in instruction. Teacher teams will continue to engage in common planning by departments on a weekly basis. This practice will continue with increased common planning time on a daily basis to conduct inquiry within department/grade level teams as well as co-planning teams. Additionally, our students will be engaged in college preparatory programs which will provide them with access to rigorous instruction and expose them to the expectations and rigors of college. This will be accomplished through Advanced Placement courses (AP for ALL) for our 11th and 12th graders and 11th grade students will be provided SAT preparatory courses through College Spring. 9th grade students will participate in an in-house collegiate academy developed by the 9th grade team. The 12th grade will be supported with a counselor focused on their specific needs. We have created a new College Access office to assist students in the college application process. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 21K559 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 303 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 1 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 8 School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 72.3% % Reduced Lunch 6.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.3% 34.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 15.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3 0% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 89% 94% 88.9% 3.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 110 93 3 86.2% 4.0% 21.1% 36.3% 11.9% 2.6% 2 5% 5.6 N/A N/A 97% 50% 94.7% 24% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School’s Strengths: Based on the 2016-17, School Quality Guide Student Achievement score is 3.81. This achievement reflects a positive difference of .57 in comparison to borough average and .48 in comparison to city average. Graduation rate is a positive correlation of +16 for group comparison average band and +15 for the city average. These positive increases are a reflection of the practices listed below:  Teachers in grade level and department teams work collaboratively on a weekly basis to assess student work and develop action plans to support all students. This collaboration is done through lesson study, Theory of Action, Kid talk, Data Driven Instruction Cycle and unit plan revisions.  Weekly Professional Learning is strategically planned to address the school’s goal of customization of instruction, student engagement through use of discussion protocols.  6 week Cycles of assessments which include Mock Regents and Interim exams are used to address deficits and inform formative and summative assessments as well as support customization of instruction.  Ongoing Participation in AP for All initiative. A number of collaborative efforts will help our students to be Career and College Ready including a College Now program with Kingsborough Community College and Long Island University Early College Scholars. Priority Needs: Inspite of these gains, we still need to work on improving regents scores in Algebra 1. The 2016-17 school quality guide indicates that we are 0.2 behind the group average and 2.0 behind in city averages. Analysis of additional data findings also indicate the following:  Based on the data from Mock Regents and Interim exams, informal and ongoing classroom assessments and Regents scores, students’ analytical and literacy skills have continued to prevent more than 50% of our student population from achieving proficiency during the 2017-2018 school year. Students’ written expression exhibits analytical deficits. Strengthen our instructional services to our Students with Disabilities and English as a New Language.    Continue with writing across the curriculum to address writing deficits 3 Increase student participation in AP courses Increase SAT Scores Increase College Readiness scores on CC ELA Exams  Continue to develop individual customization plans for struggling students     Expansion of our College Now Program with Kingsborough Community College   Expand/improve on teacher parental outreach/communication Improve student school culture and inclusion of culturally diverse activities Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, we will increase student performance on the Algebra I exam by 3% by integrating initiatives addressing accountable talk and student goal setting/conferencing with self-assessment. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Leadership Infusion Consultant, Peer Collaborative Teacher, LEAP Apprentice, Principal and Assistant Principal Grade level chair, Department chair, PCT, LEAP Apprentice, Film and Music teacher, all teaching staff. Teachers will be supported by the Peer Collaborative Teacher, LEAP Apprentice and Leadership Infusion Consultant to create research-based curriculum that will provide students with rigorous and engaging inter-disciplinary coursework designed to increase the level of rigor, track, monitor and support student progress over the course of the school year. Lowest Third, ENL, SWD, Highest Third September 2018 - June 2019 Teachers will share templates, graphic organizers and strategies for discussion and grouping that enhance and integrate customization, accountable talk, journaling, self-assessment and conferencing at the grade level meetings. Teachers in grade level team and department meetings will develop and refine schoolwide practices that integrate and respectively reinforce customization, accountable talk, journaling, self-assessment and conferencing Grade level teams; ENL students, students with IEPs, lowest third and students taking AP courses October 2018: teachers will meet in grade level team and departments to plan or further develop the schoolwide practices for customization, accountable talk, journaling, self-assessment and conferencing. By the end of November 2018, teachers in grade level teams will have a finalized, written set of schoolwide 5  practices, templates and graphic organizers. By February of 2019, teachers will meet in grade level teams and departments to adjust or refine the schoolwide practices based on assessment results. By end of March teachers will have fully implemented the newly adjusted and refined set of integrated practices Vertically aligning curriculum to show progression between grades and also the AP and SAT Curricula Department teams and all students in ELA and Social Studies classes September 2018: Curriculum should be aligned and implemented. Grade level leader, chair for each department and teachers; administrative team November 2018, January 2019, March 2019, May 2019: Review of curriculum to address deficits and progress. Co-planning sessions for ICT team teachers, AVID strategies, discussion protocols, Depth of Knowledge activities guide and Learning protocols are some of the instructional strategies that will be implemented to service the needs for all students. All pedagogical staff. At the end of each marking period Grade level leader, chair for each department; administrative team 6  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive quarterly newsletters and be invited to school events. We will provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology. We will provide parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children. We will help parents in understand City, State and Federal standards and assessments. We will share information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand. We will provide professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy and Title I funding will make it possible to provide the following: ● Peer Collaborative Teacher and LEAP Apprentice to support grade teams in the creation of authentic tasks and targeted professional learning opportunities ● Leadership Infusion Educational Consultant will offer professional learning opportunities and one-to-one teacher and/or department coaching sessions to support teachers in using research-based strategies to increase student engagement and achievement. ● Teacher per session to support teacher development  Modeling of activities by teachers   Enrichment classes provided during the 9th period class Specific Professional Learning during the allotted Pd times and outside of the building Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  An increase of 1.5% in Algebra I January Regents results  We will monitor student Marking Period grades, especially for ENL students, students with IEPs, students taking AP courses and students failing one or more classes every 6 weeks. 7   We will monitor Interim, Mock and Regents Examination results and analysis following each school wide administered cycle of assessment approximately 6 week intervals  Administrative team will monitor teacher engagement in the instructional rounds process in collaborative teams. Data will be compared to see the effectiveness of collaboration on student achievement.  Administrators will monitor all teachers weekly through walkthroughs, informal and formal observations to measure their collaborative work to improve student performance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) IO data analysis, interim assessment analysis, mock Regents exams Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the school target reports, the school has shown a steady increase during the 2016-17 and 2017-18 school years. This steady increase is in contrast to the baseline target of 94.6% set in 2015-16. However, the 2017 graduation rate was close to the baseline number and indicated a sharp increase of 10.7% with a rate of 92.1%. This number however decreased in the 2018 school year by 2.4 percent to 89.7%. In spite of these decreases, the school remained within the set NY targets. It is imperative to work towards increasing and maintaining 90% and above graduation rate. Therefore, we need to:  To increase the number of graduating students;  To improve the comprehension level of all students;  To provide all students with multiple opportunities through differentiation and customization to enable achievement and success in all areas;  To provide all teachers with professional development in the implementation of the common core curriculum and customization of instruction which will contribute to building student efficacy and academic growth;  To provide all students the opportunity to have a meaningful and supportive relationship with at least one staff member. The School community reflects the following strengths:  Mentor Groups that target the academic needs of students in a small group setting;  Kid Talk Inquiry Protocol that focuses on improving the social and academic needs of students;    Various social activities such as culture day, field day, talent show, trips which provides connection to the Frequent check-ins with the guidance counselors as it relates to pass rate and credit accumulation; Student in Need of Academic Plan (SNAP) intervention to keep students on track to graduation; school community;  Peer and afterschool tutoring to provide additional supports;  Group counselling that provides additional psychosocial emotional supports. In order to achieve these results, we have the following priority needs:  Tutoring programs that address literacy and reading comprehension skills of all students including SWD’s and ENL’s; 9   Continuation of mentoring groups for all 12th grade students for social-emotional support and academic preparedness; Increase credit accumulation;   The school and staff needs to continue to work on established systems and routines to analyze academic trends to increase the proficiency level of all students  To provide all teachers with professional development in the implementation of the common core curriculum and customization of instruction;  To provide all students with multiple opportunities for achievement and success in all areas including Increase student participation in AP Classes and College Now Classes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students will demonstrate progress towards achieving NYS Standards for 4-year graduation with a 3% increase over the 2017-2018 school year from 89.7 to 92.7% by developing senior mentor groups to support and customize intervention plans. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers and 12th grade team will continue to participate in research-based Professional Learning, six week Instructional Round cycles, and Lesson/Unit Study with curriculum revision that will address the needs of all students. Weekly professional learning and common planning meetings will provide teams of teachers with research-based instructional strategies and opportunities to improve pedagogy by participating in differentiated learning activities designed to assist them in supporting students with appropriately challenging tasks that demonstrate higher order thinking skills. Mid-year assessments will be administered in all classes to provide grade teams and teachers with a comparison analysis from the initial findings. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Peer Collaborative Teacher, Principal, Assistant Principal, teacher team, College Team, SNAP Team, Guidance Counselor, Leadership Infusion Consultant All instructional teachers September 2018 June 2019 12th grade team, instructional teachers The SNAP Intervention Team will work with high risk students to address remediation, excessive lateness/absences, academic challenges 12th Grade Team, Guidance Counselors, September 2018 June 2019 12th grade team, SNAP Team, 1  Creation of College and Career Readiness classes to provide academic support, credit checks, college preparation 12th Grade Team, Guidance Counselors, Assistant Principal, September 2018 June 2019 Guidance Counselor, instructional s 12th grade team, SNAP Team, Guidance Counselor, instructional staff The Instructional Cabinet will continue to meet weekly to evaluate the effectiveness of the CCLS folder system, implementation of discussion and assessment protocols and collaborate to make refinements as needed. Parents/Guardians will be provided with college and career resources and surveys. Creation of mentor groups to provide additional support to students by providing access to a specific adult in the building. Academic and emotional support will be provided in these groups. Tutoring for students who need enrichment because of poor academic performance in class and on Regents Exams. Parents/Guardians will be provided with college and career resources and surveys. 12th Grade Team September 2018-June 2019 12th grade team, Instructional Cabinet, Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive quarterly newsletters, monthly SLT meetings and be invited to school events  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor 2  their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parent & Family Workshops designed by Guidance Team, Special Education Team, and content-based teams • Ongoing and consistent updates and outreach via Pupilpath/Skedula and IO Education platform (throughout year); Admin Team, Guidance, Teaching staff Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy and Title I funding will make it possible to provide the following: ● Ongoing professional learning meetings with the Peer Collaborative Teacher, Leadership Infusion Consultant and LEAP Apprentice in the refinement of the CCLS (Common Core Learning Standards) folders; ● Onsite Peer Collaborative Teacher and LEAP Apprenticeship will support teachers in conducting weekly Instructional Rounds; ● Peer Collaborative Teacher, LEAP Apprentice and Leadership Infusion Consultant will assist daily in supporting teachers in the Curriculum Unit Revisions; ● Curriculum Unit Revisions in Department Meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Ongoing assessments of student progress such as interim assessments conducted in November 2018, March 2019 culminating projects and mock Regents exams conducted in December 2018 and April 2019 will reflect a 1.5% increase in Regents performance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Quality of student participation tracking system, student product based folders, student self/peer assessments, student conferencing notes, teacher data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2016-17 school quality guide, teachers demonstrated collaboration as we scored 3.9 on the continuum, which was .23 above borough average and .27 above city average. This collaboration is evident in the structures and systems that were put in place by the staff which are indicated below. LIFE Academy has established a culture of teacher collaboration. During the 2016-2017 school year our teacher teams worked on the implementation of departmental assessments and data analysis. During the 2017-2018 school year we developed the customization of instruction to ensure student achievement as demonstrated through increased course pass rates. For the 2018 - 2019 school year we will continue developing customizing instruction supported by the extension of teacher teams. Each team is charged with implementing team developed action plans, setting clear goals and evaluating progress of each goal. Teachers meet in grade teams and departmental teams to discuss curriculum, assessments, kid talk and mentors. Teachers also collaborate together in SNAP and instructional cabinet meetings.  Teachers in Departmental Teams: o Discuss assessments and data analysis o Discuss syllabi, curriculum and lessons  Teachers in Grade Teams: o Discuss kid talk (focus on one or two students and how the collective efforts of the teachers may benefit those students) o Discuss interdisciplinary projects o Discuss grade trips o Discuss the outcome of specific students with assessments given o Discuss mentor groups and activities o Teachers in SNAP:  Discuss at risk students  Discuss plans to help students who are at risk of failing o Teachers in Instructional Cabinet:  Discuss overall functions within the department as a whole  Discuss weekly plans put forth by the school (townhall, assessments, etc)  Discuss curriculum, lesson, etc. within departments o Teachers Across Different Schools (PLC)  Discuss curriculum within the Department or subject area  Discuss Advanced Placement classes and the alignment of classes to better support student  o Utilize Professional Learning Community partnership with HSSM to :  Discuss curriculum within the Departments 4   Discuss Advanced Placement classes and vertical alignment of classes to better support students.  In spite of these positive steps we need to improve our collaborative efforts to improve Regents results. The school quality guide also indicates that only 66% of staff answered positively to Innovations and collective responsibility and 86% responded positively to Peer Collaboration. These numbers are below city and borough averages. While we overall are a collaborative community, we need to continue to work on building collaboration hence:  Teachers will work collaboratively to create interdisciplinary tasks and assignments specifically the social studies and ELA Dept that will include non-fiction texts and writing across the disciplines;  Teachers will work within departments to utilize the Japanese Lesson Study plan to create, plan, execute and debrief a lesson plan;  We will collaboratively work on addressing specific reading and annotation skills that will enable students to improve their reading comprehension levels;  We will incorporate discussion protocols that will address student engagement and some aspects of customization; Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 12th grade students will show an increase of at least 3% on the Social Studies state assessment US History Regents by implementing academic instructional plans to support specifically identified learning needs. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Led by the PCT, LEAP Apprentice and Leadership Infusion Consultant, the 12th grade and content specific teams will analyze curriculum and focus on research-based instruction to set next steps for teachers. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018- June 2019 LEAP Apprentice, PCT, Leadership Infusion Consultant, Assistant Principal, Principal All 12th grade students, 12th grade team, content area teams Each teacher will bring their curriculum maps within the grade level to identify common units/themes/skills across content area Grade and Department Teams September 2018- June 2019 LEAP Apprentice, PCT, Assistant Principal, Principal Teachers in grade team will develop a unit plan draft using a research based outline for planning interdisciplinary unit In Department teams, teachers will bring their prior assessments to work out an interim assessment for the students (late October - early November 2018) Grade Team September 2018- June 2019 Peer Collaborative Teacher, Leadership Infusion Consultant, Principal In Grade team, teachers will implement the first phase of the interdisciplinary project. Teachers will then meet and discuss outcome and further work that must be done. Teachers in department teams will discuss and plan the interim assessment for this semester (late February or Early March). After assessment has been given, teachers will discuss trends that they noticed and how to customize instruction. Teachers in department teams will discuss and plan the mock regents assessment for this semester (late April or Early May). After assessment has been given, teachers will discuss trends that they noticed and how to customize instruction. Teachers in grade team will discuss the current progress of the interdisciplinary project. Teachers in department teams will discuss their overall year, glows and grows. Teachers will also discuss their plan for next 6 year and how to move forward with the trends that they saw this year. Teachers will discuss new curriculum, lessons, etc. Teachers in grade team will discuss the overall outcome of the project. Teachers will discuss how project can be improved (if needed) and perhaps how to customize the project. Parents/Guardians will be provided with access to their child’s CCLS (Common Core Learning Standards) folders which outline student progress based on targeted skill development along with individualized next steps for improvement. Ongoing access to Skedula (PupilPath) and the SNAP team will ensure that students at risk of failing or slipping in grades are supported and parents/guardians are involved in the academic improvement plan. SNAP Team September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, SNAP team, Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive quarterly newsletters, monthly SLT meetings, PCAR and be invited to school events Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy and Title I funding will make it possible to provide the following: ● Ongoing professional learning meetings with the PCT and LEAP Apprentice in the refinement of the CCLS (Common Core Learning Standards) aligned Lesson Unit Plans ● Onsite LEAP Apprentice, Peer Collaborative Teacher and Leadership Infusion Consultant will support teachers in conducting ongoing Instructional Rounds ● Onsite LEAP Apprentice and Peer Collaborative Teacher will offer professional learning opportunities both one-to-one and/or grade/department coaching sessions using research-based strategies to support the needs of students with disabilities and English Language Learners ● Curriculum Unit Revisions in Department Meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 7  During the Fall semester we will administer a mid year benchmark assessment in November 2018 to determine SWD's academic progress. More specifically, the school will administer a department created April 2019 mid course mock regents examination and will conduct an item analysis to monitor progress of students toward meeting goals for Algebra I, geometry, Living Environment and U.S. History bench marks. By January 2019 Regents administration we will see an increase of 1.5% in student pass rate. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Assessment data, Common planning minutes, lesson/unit plan revisions Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A LIFE Academy Goal for the 2018-2019 school year is building a structure for distributive leadership. Our goal is to create a system in which multiple members of teams are trained, prepared to manage and execute the responsibilities of various leadership positions. Administrators and Teachers are committed to the development of the school community and students. As a result, we have made it a priority for the 2018 - 2019 school year to provide instructional coaching and strategies in these areas with the support of the UFT Center Coach as well as a Peer Collaborative Teacher, Instructional Cabinet and the Leadership Infusion Consultant. We have established new teacher meetings, common planning meetings and summer planning opportunities. These adjustments were included as a result of the results of the 2016-2017 school quality guide. The overall score in leadership was 3.08 which is below borough and city comparisons. Inclusive leadership reflected a 84% score but teacher influence was 91% which was below city and borough averages. Utilizing teacher influence and implementing a distributive leadership approach will improve communication and build trust. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, school leaders will create and incorporate a professional learning plan that builds teacher capacity in at least one of the leadership skills of team development inquiry and facilitation of team meetings resulting in effective implementation of discussion protocols resulting in increased student engagement and student ability to demonstrate content knowledge as evidenced by a 2% increase on the Global History Regents. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Led by the LEAP Apprentice, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Leadership Infusion Consultant and the Principal, the grade and department teams in ELA, math, science, social studies and the arts will identify varied discussion and questioning protocols to best support student structured discourse as appropriate to meeting the learning targets of each lesson. The grade and department teams will collaboratively develop modified questioning and discussion protocols for ELL's and SWD's to provide them the opportunity to fully access the content and skills of the lesson while engaging in the lesson activity at appropriate levels. Core content area teachers will use instructional strategies to improve student performance and establish effective learning environments by promoting student led academic discussion in class. Teachers will be supported by the LEAP Apprentice, Peer Collaborative Teacher as well as the Principal in coaching. Additionally, teachers will be provided questioning and discussion strategies and protocols via school Google docs resources. Teachers will share best practices with colleagues during common planning and professional learning. Leadership Infusion Consultant, LEAP Apprentice, Peer Collaborative Teacher and Principal will model varied strategies and protocols during professional learning. Teachers will provide a reflection on how they will utilize the strategy/protocol in their classes and when they will begin to use it. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students September 2018- June 2019 LEAP Apprentice, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Leadership Infusion Consultant All students September 2018- June 2019 All students September 2018-June 2019 LEAP Apprentice, Principal, grade teams, department teams LEAP Apprentice, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Academic Teachers All students September 2018-June 2019 LEAP Apprentice, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Leadership Infusion Consultant, Teachers, Principal, During PTA meetings and Parent Teacher Conferences, Teachers will share information regarding the strategies and protocols they use in their classes with parents. All students September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 0  Parents will receive quarterly newsletters, monthly SLT meetings, PCAR and be invited to school events Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy and Title I funding will make it possible to provide the following: · Ongoing professional learning meetings with the LEAP Apprentice, PCT, AP/Principal, and Leadership Infusion Consultant · LEAP Apprentice, Peer Collaborative Teacher and Leadership Infusion Consultant will support teachers in conducting ongoing Instructional Rounds Administration will conduct instructional coaching with teachers with a specific focus on 3B Questioning and Discussion and 3C Engaging Students in Instruction. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 Global History Regents administration there will be a 2% increase in pass rates as a result of collaboration with the Instructional Cabinet, the LEAP Apprentice, PCT and Administrators will review current Lesson Unit Study plans and conduct a mid year review December 2018 and March 2019 of the revised plans. The expectation is to show adjustments to the lesson/unit plans and by mid year a summary of strategies that have proven to be successful or not successful. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Common planning notes, lesson/unit study revision, Advance observation Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school quality guide for 2016-2017 indicates that we scored 2.64. Parental Outreach was 80% and trust between parents and staff and principal was below the city and borough scores: 77% between students and teachers; 84% between parents and principal and 85% between parents and teachers. With this in mind, engagement needs to addressed. parent engagement include: -Provide multiple opportunities for parents to engage with the school community and in varied locations more accessible to parents -Direct outreach with parents for positive acts and experiences -Frequent conferences with parents and students focused on student performance and data -Create a quarterly newsletter to enhance communication by and for diverse audiences (students, parent, teachers) -Provide information regarding college, internship and career access programs and resources As a result, a priority for the 2018-2019 school year is creating opportunities for strengthening communication between the school and parents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, the school will develop a more collaborative partnership with families by creating a published communication to be distributed to the school community (Students, Parents, Teachers, Community) on a quarterly basis to increase family attendance at school events by 5%. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Forming a newsletter committee including the parent coordinator, community associate, teacher advisors and students. Members of the school community will be asked to participate by providing interviews, resources and/or articles. All Students October 2018 - June 2019 Inclusion of students at each grade level inclusive of special populations. Special attention will be given to the outreach of ELL's and SWD students volunteers to participate. All Students October 2018 -June 2019 The parent coordinator will work with members of the SLT and PTA to disseminate information and/or engage additional parents of and community members. All Students October 2018 - June2019 The newsletter will communicate, clarify and support instructional goals to celebrate students and school achievement. All Students October 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Support Staff, Parent Coordinator, community associate, students, Assistant Principal, Principal Teachers, Support Staff, Parent Coordinator, community associate Teachers, Support Staff, Parent Coordinator, community associate, PTA, SLT Teachers, Support Staff, parent coordinator, community associate, staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parents will receive quarterly newsletters, monthly SLT meetings, PCAR and be invited to school events Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy and Title I funding will make it possible to provide the following: 3  Key staff members needed to implement this action plan include the parent coordinator, community associate, teachers/staff, students, PTA members Assistant Principal and Principal. Resources include paper, color ink, after school per session as needed Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Production and assessment of the newsletters will occur in December 2018, February 2019, April 2019 and June 2019. By January 2019 we will see an increase of 2% family attendance at school events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Researched based surveys, completion of modules and accuracy of work completed will help determine success . Charts and graphs will comprise Student data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Essay writing using scaffolds that can be removed over time Small group instruction, tutoring Regents preparatory courses During school day and after school as determined Modeling mathematically Small group instruction, tutoring Regents preparatory courses During school day and after school as determined Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students not scoring a 3 or higher in the CCLS Literacy folders targeted skill assessments Students performing below academic standards identified by , SNAP referrals, teacher teams, excessive lateness/attendance, failing interim or regents exams Students not scoring a 3 or higher in the CCLS mathfolder targeted skill assessments Students performing below academic standards identified bySNAP referrals, teacher teams, excessive lateness/attendance, failing interim or regents exams 5  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students not scoring a 3 or higher in the CCLS Literacy folders targeted skill assessments Students performing below academic standards identified by , SNAP referrals, teacher teams, excessive lateness/attendance, failing interim or regents exams Students not scoring a 3 or higher in the CCLS Literacy folders targeted skill assessments Students performing below academic standards identified by , SNAP referrals, teacher teams, excessive lateness/attendance, failing interim or regents exams SNAP, Counseling Graphic Organizers, Chunking Text, Pre-Writing Activities Small group instruction, tutoring Regents preparatory courses During school day and after school as determined During school day and after school as determined DBQ pre-writing using Small group instruction, tutoring graphic organizers Regents preparatory courses The Guidance Counselor, One-to-one Small group School Psychologist and During school day and after school as determined Social Worker provide mandated and at risk counseling based on the needs of each student . 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 13 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STH will be provided with academic resources as needed throughout the school year such as book bags, note books, folders, pens/pencils, waivers for college applications, access to preventive social services to address issues such as housing, child care, employment and health care. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 13 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7 STH will be provided counseling, resources such as clothing, toiletries, books 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $5000 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Administrative staff attends recruitment fairs and reviews resumes on open market to identify and recruit HQT who demonstrate a commitment to self-reflection and goal-setting ● Prospective hires must provide references, sit for a panel interview and conduct a demo lesson ● Non-HQT will be monitored closely to ensure all the required documentation and assessment deadlines are met ● Mentors are assigned to support struggling and unqualified teachers and additional professional conversations will be held with teachers who are unable to provide evidence toward goal attainment ● All of our staff members are continually offered multiple opportunities to engage in staff development ● Offering in-house mentoring to all teachers new to the system through internal new teacher meetings ● Teachers and counselors are provided with workshops on graduation requirements in order to better prepare the students in their classes. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). LEAP Apprentice and Peer Collaborative Teacher that collaborate to provide: ● Weekly professional learning meetings ● Instructional Rounds for teachers 9  ● Lesson Unit Study ● Curriculum Unit Refinements ● One-to-one and/or small group mentoring/coaching access for all pedagogy Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Resources will provide additional support to address the needs of students demonstrating skill deficiency and progress monitoring. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Support will provided during lunch and learn as well as after school. Curriculum will be revised to reflect the necessary adjustments to address the needs of students. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The LEAP Apprentice and Leadership Infusion Educational Consultant provide professional development to staff in order to promote an understanding of assessments and data analysis. Data analysis conducted by teams of teachers result in individualized interventions as well as the revision of curriculum to implement strategic benchmarks/outcomes/tasks. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 0  consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 227,050.00 0 0 0 1,884,358.00 x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) p. 11, 15, 17 P. 11, 15, 17 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 1   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. [LIFE Academy HS for Film and Music] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [LIFE Academy HS for Film and Music] will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; * providing assistance and workshops to parents and guardians regarding the college application and Financial Aid process 3  ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional learning opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 4  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress School-Parent Compact (SPC) [LIFE Academy HS for Film and Music] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 5  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 6  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 7  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 8  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 21 School Name Life Academy for Film and Music Borough Brooklyn School Number 559 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Eugenia Kelch Coach Selena Farrier ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Victor Kurylyk Teacher/Subject Area Ana Rodriguez/ Spanish Teacher/Subject Area Julianne Sarrantonio/Math Related-Service Provider James Martucci Superintendent Michael Prayor Assistant Principal Catherine Inniss Coach Jennifer Callender School Counselor Jean Brutus Parent Theresa Ford Parent Coordinator Aundreus Patterson Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Keith Raskin/Data Specialist C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 0  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 339 Total number of ELLs 31 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.14% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL Lang. Russian Arabic Chinese Spanish Haitian Creole 0 0 Japanese DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 3 1 1 4 3 1 10 3 1 0 0 0 0 1 21 1 6 1 2 Tot # 5 4 5 14 2 1 31 1 2 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? NYSELAT and NYSITELL (for the newly arrived ENLs), Common Core Literacy Skills (CCLS), Periodic Assessment based on CCLSs, MOSL Assessment, interim assessments and mock Regents exams. The data of both NYSELAT and NYSITELL provide ENL and content teachers with information about linguistic skills ENLs are lacking in order to achieve proficiency. : While the RLAT report in ATS provides raw scores, the RNMR provides the last three years’ NYSESLAT scale scores as well as each student’s modality results for reading/writing and speaking/listening. The NYSESLAT RLAT report historically has indicated that ENLs struggle with reading and especially writing skills. This information will be used in planning lesson activities, assessments, raising awareness of the needs of ENLs at PLs, as well as providing extra support to EnLs in English and content classes through vocabulary instruction, modeling writing, understanding the writing 1  process and editing. In collaboration with content teachers, Mr. Kurylyk will modify lesson plans in content areas to target those skills on a daily basis. The CCLS-based assessments focus on five common core literacy skills: a) Reading comprehension; b) Taking a position; c) Ability to write a claim and a counterclaim; d) Citing evidence; e) Drawing inferences. The initial CCLS assessments and MOSL provide an ENL and content teachers with information on incoming students basic skills. The following assessments allow to progress in CCLS over a designated period of time. This year both content and ENL teachers are using self-assessment rubric to track student progress in the CCLSs over the course of the academic year. The data of CCLS assessments are frequently subjected to the analysis at our weekly PLs with the purpose of designing responsive, coherent instruction across content areas. Our Teacher Center Coordinator Ms. Callender focuses on instructional strategies to maximize student engagement and progress in CCLS as a means to attain better results on the Regents exams and improve graduation rate. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Departmental common planning and grade team development have been established to provide teacher teams the opportunity to conduct inquiry of student work, conduct data analysis, develop customized plans/activities to meet student needs as demonstrated in class and data results, and collaborate on interdisciplinary projects. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ENL program evaluation consists of several key components. First, it is the quantitative analysis of scores received by ENLs on the NYSESLAT, Regents exams and how they match with CCLS folders. Second, it is the observation cycle consisting of a pre-observation, an observation and a post-observations where different issues of instruction, classroom environment, student engagement etc are discussed face-to-face with Mr. Kurylyk. Third, at the end of each of marking period Ms Kelch (Principal) would sit with the ENL and content teachers to discuss the progress of ENL's. Finally, the scores of ENLs on the CCLS folders Regents Exams and the NYSESLAT are always in the center of attention of the School Instructional Team (the School Cabinet), which form the agenda for the weekly PLs and School Instructional Team meetings. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL teacher will work collaboratively with co-teachers to create customized tasks responsive to results of the data analysis during common planning meetings as well as PL. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The cumulative CCLS folder data report at the end of academic year reflects the progress ENL's have made in CCLS, as well as enables to match the results to MOSL, mock Regents exams and NYSESLAT assessment. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Common planning and Professional Learning provide the means to disseminate the findings and make the necessary adjustments to customize instruction and assessments based on data results. Part IV: ELL Programming 2  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 1a. Within a Freestanding ENL program at Life Academy we use both pull-out and push-in organizational models which depends on the number of ENLs in the school and their proficiency levels. In the pull-out ENL classes students are grouped in heterogeneous classes. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2. All ENL students at Life ACADEMY (identified through the scores of the NYSESLAT exam), were placed in ICT classes and Mr Kurylyk pushed-in to one of the content classes to provide the minimum of mandated minutes of ELL service weekly. The choice of service to ENL was defined by three factors: the number of ENL, the proficiency level, the results of the ELA Regents exam, which has become another means of testing out of the ENL. 2a. One hour of push-in service to ELA class daily meets the requirement of 1 unit of study in ELA in intregrated English for ENLs with expanding level of proficiency. Additionally, to insure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided to the ENL who tested intermediate second time during the day by doing push-in. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Through PLs all Life Academy teachers are trained to differentiate and then customize instruction, use scaffolded question and break down content to support ENLs. When Mr. Kurylyk provides push-in ENL instruction, he focuses on individual needs of ENLs. Working closely with ENLs, Mr.Kurylyk can translate assignments into Ukrainian or Russian (if applicable) or break down assignments to facilitate understanding or help construct a written response; he monitors comprehension and vocabulary development. At the same time, he encourages to use bilingual dictionaries and native language during accountable talk. In his pull-out ENL class, Mr.Kurylyk tries to include primary sources (maps, pictures, documents etc.), readings from different content areas and make content connections to activate background knowledge gained in those subjects. For example, working on the unit about immigration, Mr. Kurylyk focused on different content connections to Global and American History, Geography, human relations, and personal identity. He uses journal writing, modeling, demonstration, graphic organizers, adapted texts, visual aids, content vocabulary, peer tutoring, multimedia to clarify, enhance and differentiate content instruction. Mr. Kurylyk constantly uses paraphrasing technique to promote vocabulary use in academic writing on different content topics. He pairs up ENLs with stronger students. In accordance with the goals of the CCLS, Mr. Kurylyk uses different methods to develop students' critical thinking through the techniques of close reading, questioning, scaffolded writing that focuses on taking a position, writing claims and counterclaims, citing evidence and making inferences. Native language support is provided through the use of dictionaries and translation of certain terms (when applicable). 3  In addition, like other staff members, Mr. Kurylyk implements CCLS portfolio assessment for ENLs in his classes to monitor the growth of their academic and critical thinking skills. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Since Life Academy provides a Freestanding ENL Program, there is no mandated system in place that evaluates ENLs' native language development, except for initial evaluation for Spanish speakers through Spanish LAB. The bilingual teachers working at Life Academy (who speak Chinese, Spanish, Arabic, Russian, Ukrainian) can informally evaluate language proficiency of ENLs in those languages. This year we will work on developing a means of conducting a formal interim assessment to assess student progress throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6. Differentiation of instruction for ENLs is based on the following criteria: the NYSESLAT proficiency level, years of ENL service and availability of IEP. Pre-assessment and understanding student needs is the first step of differentiation. The Teacher's Center Coordinator, the ESL teacher and content teachers work together to develop interventions focusing on the needs of ENLs. Group work or individualized instruction (for example, push-in ENL), alternate assessments or providing choices in completing an assignment on a daily basis- these are key components that provide both structured conversations with classmates and a low stress, but at the same time a meaningful growth-oriented educational environment for ENLs. 6a. Introduction of CCLS has multiple perspectives both for Students with Interrupted Formal Education and general education students. On the one hand, SIFE students have gaps of knowledge. On the other hand, CCLSs clearly indicate where they are supposed to be. Therefore, CCLS periodic and interim assessments across content areas at Life Academy help bridge the gap in the missing knowledge of SIFE students. The school has after-school extended day for ENL students to help promote speaking, listening, reading and writing skills of ENLs. In class the ENL teacher uses authentic materials, visuals, scaffolded questions, vocabulary paraphrasing techniques, think aloud, journals and sentence starters to promote academic skills of SIFE students. 6b. For newcoming ENLs and those who have been in the country for less than 3 years, the ENL teacher provides additional support through translation, visuals, manipulatives, sound repetitions, modeling, sentence starters and other techniques. The main focus is vocabulary, grammar, comprehension and language expression skills. After school and lunch tutoring expands opportunities for cultural adaptation and academic support. The main purpose is to integrate ENLs in the school community and to help them overcome stress, language barrier, peer pressure, promote self-esteem and college readiness. Mr. Kurylyk collaborates with content teachers to modify instruction and assessment, facilitate grouping and discussion, as well as to break down content to make it more comprehensible to newcoming ENLs. 6c. Along with preparing rigorous assignments, based on the authentic and content-based materials focusing on expanding vocabulary, complex and critical thinking, Mr. Kurylyk ensures that academic requirements are in line with student language development. New vocabulary words and grammar are explained in the context of content texts. Students are taught how to take notes and apply close reading skills. With the help of scaffolded questions they show their comprehension and learn how to develop an argument using evidence from the text. Text analysis and evaluation of evidence allows students to develop strong writing skills which are aligned with CCLS. 6d. DIfferentiation of instruction for long-term ENLs is similar to those used in the work with developing ELNs who have been in the country for 4-6 years. The challenging work should be combined with focus on developing their literacy and critical thinking skills, aligned with CCLS. They also need some explicit grammar instruction because on most formal assessments they usually score low on writing conventions component. These students are very sensitive in their needs and thus should be paired up with more successful peers to build their self-esteem and emulate successful strategies in language acquisitions. Special attention should be paid to explanation and understanding of assignments, breaking it down to more comprehensible level. For example, assigning an essay should be followed by all the steps of the writing process including teaching how to outline an essay, take notes, organize ideas in body paragraphs; analyze evidence, evaluate and edit own work by integrating 4  academic vocabulary. 6e. All content teachers are made aware of ENLs and former ENLs in their classes. That means they have to differentiate and scaffold instruction to meet their needs or offer choices for alternate assessments. In case of need all ENLs or former ENLs seek additional support from both content teachers and ENL teacher Mr. Kurylyk. On all kinds of periodic, final, standardized or Regents assessments, like ENLs, former ENLs have extended time. They can use dictionaries in content classes and are eligible for after school and during lunch tutoring. All students are monitored to ensure that they continue to progress in language development, literacy and content knowledge. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All teachers of IEP ENLs have their IEPs and use them for planning, instruction, and behavior management. Both ENL and content teachers use the same content materials as they use with general education students, but they are required to make modifications and differentiation to make the content more accessible for IEP ENLs. The instruction strategies used by teachers of IEP ENLs address both their linguistic and cultural characteristics. For example, typing information in a bigger print, repeating information several times, or explaining the assignment explicitly etc. are some of the issues that ENL and content teachers need to address to support IEP ENLs. Instructional strategies include using scaffolds, such as graphic organizers and visual aids, peer support, giving learning prompts, modifying language that is appropriate to the student’s English language proficiency, strong emphasis on academic vocabulary and literacy skills; project-based and cooperative learning, using pre-reading and pre-writing activities, editing, etc. All programming for IEP ENLs is based on the NYSESLAT results and IEPs. The guidance counselor ensures that, besides proper programs, there is a ICT teacher in each class attended by IEP ENLs. - Textbooks: For Your Information: Reading and Vocabulary Skills, - Pearson Longman, 2007; North Star (for ESL students of different proficiency levels); Great Essays: An Introduction to Writing Essays. - Authentic readings in different content areas: Scholastic, Daily News, New York Post, Fact FInders, National Geographic; etc. - Books: "New Kids in Town", "The Little Prince", "Tom Sawyer" (adapted), The Sister's Keeper, biographical novel "Helen Keller", "The House on Mango Street", informational texts and articles. - High interest books for Independent Reading for all reading grade levels. - Dictionaries: Longman - Bilingual translation dictionaries: Urdu, Arabic, Spanish, Chinese (Mandarin), Russian Visuals: clips, videos, pictures, maps etc. Primary sources: documents. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Life Academy provides a comfortable, yet growth-oriented environment for all ENLs. For that purpose we try to ensure curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ENLs withing the least restrictive environment. Due to a small ENL population, all ENLs including IEP ENLs are programmed to either ungraded heterogenous pull-out ENL class or push-in content classes in which Mr. Kurylyk provides language development support to ENLs . This choice is based on the IEP ENL's learning needs, proficiency level and academic (graduation) requirements. For example, en IEP ELL with entering proficiency level would not be programmed into a push-in ENL class. The heterogeneous ICT content class with an IEP ELL would have a limited number of students and at least 2 licensed teachers. As an assigned ESL teacher in that class, Mr. Kurylyk will be responsible for providing language development support to the IEP ENL. This setting provides least restrictive environment for the IEP ENL to develop academic skills in collaboration with his/her peers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 5  Targeted interventions are administered by several different teams with all of them supporting each other. The communication between these teams is facilitated by Skedula - the online database resource. If ENLs fall behind in academics or attendance the SNAP team (responsible for academic intervention) gets in touch with families to inform about the problem. Simultaneously, a meeting is scheduled between a SNAP team representative and an ENL, which can also involve a parent/ guardian who will be mandated to attend the meeting once the problem gets worse. These meetings set the milestones for academic (behavior) improvement. Teacher's Center Coordinator Ms. Callender and Mr. Kurylyk provide a continuous input to content teachers on how to maximize ENL engagement and language development through designing a coherent instruction, student assessment and self-assessment, implementing CCLS and differentiating instruction in content areas. An Inquiry Team works on modifying lesson plans to improve instruction. Finally, Teacher's Center has been implementing instructional rounds - inter-visitations of groups of teachers designed to monitor the implementation of teaching practices, CCLS standards and provide input on instructional techniques. The results of assessments and intervention programs are discussed at the Instructional Cabinet meetings. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Each year within our budget constraints we try to improve our acting programs designed to improve academic performance, accountability and networking aimed at implementation of CCLS and improving college readiness. These programs include the UFT Teacher's Center, weekly PLs, Instructional Teams, Inquiry Team, Instructional Rounds, SNAP Team (Academic Interventions), using Skedula, CCLS portfolio assessment. Each of these programs creates coherence in the combined effort to create a school community and academically rigorous environment. The communication and networking between these teams will be the focus for this year. We have expanded the field trips program over the past year to allow students visit colleges and explore opportunities before graduating from Life Academy. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We provide academic support to ESL students in content and ESL classes during lunch and after school tutoring. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Through ICT programming ENLs get equal access to the same curriculum as English-proficient students. Content teachers collaborate with the Teacher's Center, the ENL and ICT teachers to develop or modify lessons, projects and assessments to ensure that ENLs are not academically disadvantaged against their native English speaking peers. Students lacking credits for graduation can make up them through iLearn. Other programs available for ENLs are: Student Government, PSAL Lafayette Sports Teams (PSAL funding), music production, Film/Music Expo, National Honor Society. Life Academy also offers Saturday School (iLearn) and enrichment programs through Coney Island Generaltion Gap (non-profit). 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Materials used in the classroom include: • Laptop carts with access to the Internet and word processing software for individual projects, class work, periodic assessments, or group work. • Projectors, Smartboards, teacher created power points to support class discussions and group work. • Various levels of ESL textbooks: "The North Star", "Visions" • Authentic high interest books for Independent Reading for all reading grade levels covering all genres, especially non-fiction to support other academic subjects. • Bilingual translation dictionaries in all the native languages of our students. - Webster's Thesaurus, Longman Dictionary - Lafayette Educational Complex library gives access to the native-language materials in languages spoken by students: Urdu, Russian, Chinese, Spanish and others. 6  - In content areas ENLs have access to authentic grade-level materials. Also, teachers use visuals, multimedia, demonstrations, manipulatives. - Students have access to EBSCO, GALE and other databases through which they can have audio readings in content areas at the selected speed, or content materials translated to their native languages (Urdu, Russian, Chinese, Spanish). - ENLs can read English classics in both English and native language (Chinese) - ENLs explore National Geographic Reading Expeditions in their native language (Chinese) 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ENLs are encouraged to use their first language during peer tutoring and accountable talk that will help them access the material used in classes. Both content and ENL teachers use bilingual translation dictionaries, as well as help from classmates who speak the language of ENLs. Students may opt to take Regents exams in their native language. Cultural Festivals (Spanish Heritage, Asian Heritage, Winter Show) promote the spirit of pride of students' native cultures and languages. Content and ENL teachers use EBSCO and GALE online databases to support ENLs and give them an option to access the material taught in their native languages. They can also translate selected passages into their native languages using the special features of the given databases. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All curricula are alligned with age appropriate CCLS. Our mission is to give equal access to ELLs in all content areas. It is imperative that our ENLs receive resources and support appropriate for a college bound high school student. That is why college-readiness instruction is a priority. Each week all students at our school receive one hour of college-readiness instruction. Since the implementation of CCLS principles in everyday instruction, ENLs benefit from each ENL or content class they attend. Our experienced teachers are their major resource; they provide them with everything they need to succeed at LIFE. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Materials used in the classroom include: • Laptop carts with access to the Internet and word processing software for individual projects, class work, periodic assessments, or group work. • Projectors, Smartboards, teacher created power points to support class discussions and group work. • Various levels of ENL textbooks: "The North Star", "Visions" • Authentic high interest books for Independent Reading for all reading grade levels covering all genres, especially non-fiction to support other academic subjects. • Bilingual translation dictionaries in all the native languages of our students. - Webster's Thesaurus, Longman Dictionary - Lafayette Educational Complex library gives access to the native-language materials in languages spoken by students: Urdu, Russian, Chinese, Spanish and others. - In content areas ENLs have access to authentic grade-level materials. Also, teachers use visuals, multimedia, demonstrations, manipulatives. - Students have access to EBSCO, GALE and other databases through which they can have audio readings in content areas at the selected speed, or content materials translated to their native languages (Urdu, Russian, Chinese, Spanish). - ENLs can read English classics in both English and native language (Chinese) - ENLs explore National Geographic Reading Expeditions in their native language (Chinese) 7  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). ENLs entering Life Academy from intermediate schools are required to attend an orientation workshop at the start of the school year. They are exposed to the facilities, programs at Life Academy, including the ENL Program, and school culture. New admits who enroll during the school year are warmly welcomed by the Parent Coordinator who introduces them to the staff, programs and facilities. New ENLs access to all the programs accessible to other students at Life Academy including Athletic programs and sports teams, tutoring, student government, counseling. During scheduled times Mr. Kurylyk works closely with such students to help them in social and cultural adaptation, and language development. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We are currently offering only one foreign language elective -Spanish. Students who have native speaking proficiency in another foreign language are offered to take a LOTE proficiency exam in that language in order to qualify for 6 credits in foreign language. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. Professional development is not only an important component of professional growth of all the teachers who service ELLs, but is also an important part of Professional Responsibilities within the Danielson's Framework that the school has been implementing. Life Academy has maintained the UFT Teacher's Center whose major function is to provide Professional Development to Life Academy teachers every Monday. One of the most important issues is facilitating transition of Life Academy teachers in integrating CCLS into everyday instruction. To address other components of the Danielson's Framework the Teacher's Center focuses on the important elements of Planning and Preparation, Classroom Environment, and most importantly, instruction and student engagement. All teachers participate in instructional rounds during which they both have a chance to show how they implement different elements of the Danielson's Framework, and also share in small groups what they have seen in the classes observed. Another aspect of professional development is the work in Inquiry Teams; in small groups teachers present their lesson plans following the protocol, discuss how they can be improved based on the demands of CCLS and Danielson's Framework. Besides weekly Professional Development sessions, Coach from the Teacher Center Ms. Callender, has also designed a schedule of Instructional Rounds and individual meetings with teachers to support them with implementing CCLS and Danielson's Framework. Leadership Infusion Consultant Elma Powell facilitates professional development with consultations and supports teachers with both individual observations and follow up visits. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 8  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. SNAP (Academic Intervention) Team works really hard to keep track of student attendance and academic performance. To facilitate this process all staff members were trained to use Skedula online database to enter grades, academic performance and behavior data. The system is updated on a daily basis which gives the SNAP team enough information on the follow-up of student performance in each class and designing an action plan. First, a student in jeopardy of failing is scheduled for a meeting with the team. Simultaneously, the SNAP representative is making the outreach to the student's family to let the parents know about the situation. If no progress is made after parent conference, teacher must notify the SNAP Team and the meeting with the parent will be scheduled. The next step will be a referral to the guidance and administration. This component is met both during weekly PLs for all the staff and individual meetings with Teacher's Center Coach Ms. Callender. Mr. Kurylyk, the ENL Teacher, and all content teachers serving ENL are not only the participants of PLs planned to meet the needs of ENLs, but are also co-creators of such PLs, as they ask questions about differentiation and serving ENLs. Lesson Planning Inquiry Teams further discuss the implementation of instructional strategies, while Instructional Rounds help teachers gain insights and share their opinions about effectiveness of those strategies. All the records about PL meetings, instructional rounds, lesson planning inquiry meetings, unit plans, curriculum maps and differentiation of lessons to meet the needs of ENLs and IEP students are maintained by literacy coach and TC's Coordinator Ms Callender. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 1. At the end of the first semester (in January) Mr. Kurylyk schedules appointments to individually meet with the parents or guardians of ENLs to discuss the goals of the Freestanding ENL program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. The parents have a chance to talk to all content teachers and find out about the performance of their children before the end of the Fall semester. The individual meetings can be scheduled at an earlier time in case an ENL is not in compliance in terms of behavior, attendance or academic failure. All of the described aspects of performance are under control of the SNAP team who monitor closely students who are at-risk of failure. 2. This meeting is conducted in the child’s home language (in case there is no staff who speaks the language which is convenient for parents, the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit is called). All records of individual meetings will be kept student files including outreach (letters, phone calls), record of attendance and notes of the meeting. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents/guardians of newly enrolled ENL are given behavior expectations, information about graduation requirements and college readiness, and a page describing the program requirements for a free standing ENL program at Life Academy. Parents/guardians are also invited to PTA meetings where presentations on graduation requirements, the Regents exams, college process, school accountability measures, and basic computer skills (logging into Skedula) is addressed. We also send home letters, memos, e-mails and use our phone messenger to deliver important messages about school life and student attendance. Very often parents are invited to be Chaperons on field trips. We try to accommodate parent needs through our bililngual staff. h buire invited to be shaperons on field trips. The lines of coomunication are spup ngual staff who speak the following native languages of ENLs: Mr. Kurylyk speaks Ukrainian/Russian; Ms. Callender and Ms. Rodriguez speak Spanish; Ms. Diaz speaks Chinese (Mandarin and Cantonese); Mr. Abufahra speaks Arabic. In case we do not have a staff member to communicate with a parent/guardian we would utilize the translation phone 9  line from the DOE. Mr. Aundreus Patterson is a PTA representative who does outreach with all of the parents. ENL parents are encouraged to participate in the Sschool Leadership Team meeting and important decision making regarding budget, afterschool activities, programs, academic data, including graduation, passing rate etc. In the spring, we invite all parents to complete the Learning Environment Survey. Additionally, every year Life Academy hosts Cultural Festivals, Thanksgiving Share, Awards and Talent Shows to which all parents are invited. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Eugenia Kelch, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: K 559 School DBN: 21K559 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Eugenia Kelch Title Principal Catherine Inniss Assistant Principal Aundreus Patterson Parent Coordinator Victor Kurylk ENL/Bilingual Teacher Theresa Ford Parent Anna Rodriguez Teacher/Subject Area Keith Raskin Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Callender Selena Farrier Coach Coach Jean Brutus School Counselor Michael Prayor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: K559 Superintendent: Michael Prayor DBN: 21K559 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Victor Victor Kurylyk Kurylyk ENL Teacher ENL Teacher No No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. According to the RLAT report in ATS, there are 5 ELLs who come from homes where the language other than English is spoken. The following are the language backgrounds of our students: Ukrainian -1, Haitian Creole - 1, Arabic- 1, Chinese (Mandarin) -1, Spanish -1. According to the RNMR report in ATS, in the homes of 11 former ELLs (information about 9 th graders was not available) the following languages are spoken: Chinese, Haitian Creole, French and Spanish, The need for written translation and oral interpretation services is identified through information provided by parents in HLIS, the proficiency level of parents assessed by the staff at the orientation and the need of parents to watch the Parent Orientation Video in the language other than English. Another way to assess parents' need in translation is through parent outreach done by SNAP teams, parent-teacher conferences, IEP and Individual meeting with parents of ELLs, and different informal meeting such as talent shows, field trips, cultural festivals etc. Based on these needs and requests, Life Academy uses both in-school and outside resources 3  to provide oral and written translation of all outgoing written documents into target languages spoken by parents at homes. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral According to HLIS, Student Emergency Contact cards and ATS data, all of the parents of ELLs and former ELLas preferred both written and oral communication in English and their native languages. Life Academy has to provide translation and interpretation services to families in Spanish, in French, in Haitian Creole, in Chinese, in Arabic and in Ukrainian. English 80 Spanish 20 Spanish Russian Chinese Arabic English 80 Spanish 20 Spanish Russian Chinese Arabic 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 4  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families September/2017 November/2017 December/2017 January/2018 February/2018 March/2018 April/2018 November/2018 December/2018 January/2019 February/2019 March/2019 April/2019 May/2019 June/2019 May/2018 June/2018 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Utilize translation services - phone conferences and translate documents Utilize translation services - phone conferences and translate documents September/2018 Utilize translation services - phone conferences and translate documents Calendars Parent-teacher conference announcements After-school information New York Regents dates Information about report cards Letters from the school leadership Regents dates/review Summer School School Year opening 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 5  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? School staff will assist with translation along with translation services office 1. Parent orientation and curriculum night (September) September/2017 2. Parent-teacher conferences and Meet the staff meetings (September, end of October, March, May) 3. Individual meeting with ELL parents/ IEP meetings 4. SNAP meetings - if a child is in danger of failure (academic intervention). Besides phone calls and letters, it can be preceded by a visit of the Attendance Teacher. November/2017 March/2018 May/2018 September/2018 November/2018 March/2019 May/2019 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School staff will work with translation services to communicate with families in the event of an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff will be provided resources such as dictionaries, technology and translation services information Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In accordance with Chancellor's Regulations A-663, Life Academy will determine within 30 (thirty) days of a student’s enrollment the primary language spoken by the parent of each student enrolled in the school, and if such language is 6  not English, the parent will be provided with language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the Department. At the entrance to the main office parents will see a Welcome Poster. Through Parents' Guide to Language Access and Language ID Guide the staff will be able to identify the language a parent speak at home during the first contact. The school will maintain an appropriate and current record of the primary language of each parent. Such information willt be maintained in ATS and on the student emergency card. In order to communicate effectively with parents whose home language is not English, Life Academy will provide language assistance services using both in-house staff, volunteer and the DOE resources in translation and interpretation of the following: a. registration, application, and selection; b. standards and performance (e.g., standard text on report cards); c. conduct, safety, and discipline; d. special education and related services; and e. transfers and discharges. Also, Life Academy will provide parents whose primary language is a covered language with a translation of any document that contains individual, student-specific information regarding, but not limited to, a student’s: a. health; b. safety; c. legal or disciplinary matters; and d. entitlement to public education or placement in any Special Education, English Language Learner or non-standard academic program. In case Life Academy does not have any staff members or volunteers who speak the language of parents, it will request help at the Translation and Interpretation Unit within DOE to (a) translate such critical communication in a timely manner, in each of the covered languages; and (b) work with the office responsible for the critical communication to make such translations available to the schools. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents will be provided with Parent's Guide to Language Access. It directs parents to translated content on the DOE website and asks them to provide their feedback on the language services they received at our school. Also, at the end of the year parents will be helped to complete the parent survey, in which they will provide the feedback on the quality and availability of translation and interpretation services. 7 
