 14K577 School Name: CONSELYEA PREPARATORY SCHOOL Principal: MARIA MASULLO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information MS 577 331400010577 6-8 School Number (DBN): 14K577 208 North 5 th Street Brooklyn, NY 11211 718-486-6211 718-486-6771 Phone Number: Fax: Maria Masullo Mmasull2@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Mrs. Masullo Danielle Eberle MaribelRodriguez Karen Stevenson NataliaLorenc St. Nick's Alliance Ivelise Arroyo CBO Representative: Geographical District: 14 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Alicja Winnicki Superintendent: 215 Heyward Street Brooklyn, NY awinnicki@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-302-7600 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street bfitzgerald@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-225-5119 Phone Number: 718-935-4314 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Maria Masullo Danielle Eberle Maribel Rodriguez Loretta Mangano Dinorah Alicea Antoinette Como Galasso NataliaLorenc Kimberly Cirillo *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable parent parent parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Carmen Bitar Karen Stevenson Yinorah Varela Rachel Herman Bailey Pope Karen McQuillan Karen Bachman Gabriella Smith-Coventry parent Assistant Principal Staff Teacher parent Teacher parent teacher/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The MS 577 family is devoted to the development (educational, emotional, social and physical) of our adolescent children. We believe that all students can meet or exceed the rigorous academic standards put forth to them. Our students are curious and creative learners who succeed through personal initiatives and sustained effort. They are also critical thinkers who search for knowledge in all subject areas. Our students excel in a myriad of academic areas, and are offered an extension to higher level educational credits in Mathematics, Science and Foreign Language. We   encourage and construct multicultural awareness and sensitivity in children and adults, as well as a fundamental respect for self, others, and the community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our goal is to make the “school” experience the cornerstone of our student’s “lifelong” learning experience, to propel them on a pathway to college and a fulfilling future. Real life situations are infused in a rigorous curriculum daily to promote social growth as well as prepare our students for this path. MS 577’s classrooms are inclusive to the learning styles of all students to ensure understanding at all academic levels. Teachers, administrators, and staff form a rich, professional learning community and seek opportunities to collaborate with our neighboring schools. We envision parents as partners and encourage them to participate in learning with their child and our teachers to maximize our “open door” policy to benefit everyone. Parents are given the opportunity to offer valued input and participate in the decision making of our academic and enrichment programs. MS 577 offers an enriched, culturally diverse learning environment to support the needs of our students. Middle School 577 is located in a centrally diverse neighborhood. We strongly believe that embracing our surroundings and using them as an added resource benefits all learners. Our mission to delivery instruction in all lessons, vertically and horizontally, based on the Gardner’s Theory of Multiple Intelligence that will support student success and progress. We have implemented a wide variety of instructional strategies to meet the needs of every student in our school. Our students are exposed to learning in a variety of settings, from exploratory navigation to student led conversations. Our teachers take a vested interest in each of their students. Our motto is to treat each child as if they were your own! Over the past several years, we have seen our students flourish through high school and forge into college! We truly are Leading the Way Towards Excellence! Middle School is a very important time in adolescence; parent support and communication continue to make students succeed. As a school community, we invite and welcome parents and family members to work alongside us as team members to provide rigorous academic instruction as well as the support needed for students to grow socially and emotionally. Our open door policy for all parents gives them the opportunity to visit our school at any time and be welcomed with open arms. Our PTA supports our vision and continues to mirror our beliefs. The programs offered in our school vary year to year. Each year, we capture the “student voice” through surveying the student population about their interests. The data derived from the survey drives the programming choices offered to students. Offering programs in which they are interested keeps our attendance soaring. Students have ownership of their learning, which keeps them focused, and motivated. Listening to the feedback from the parents is extremely important. Education as a whole is continuously revised based on feedback from a variety of sources. The Middle School 577 community recognizes the continuous change and has committed themselves to improve and enhance the overall educational experience offered in our school. As a school community we have joined together to support and partner with many community organizations. St. Nick’s organization has been a partner with MS577 for the past two years. The after school program has flourished with “new” opportunities for our students. Our students were given the opportunity to participate in guitar club, street hockey, soccer, ping pong, sewing, art and many more student driven programs. We expose our students to the world beyond the classroom and teach them to help their fellow neighbors. We partnered with on St. Nick's Alliance as our central CBO to serve our students. Our partnership with St. Nick's has allowed our staff to be a part of the program. The after school program at MS 577 mirrors our school policies and supports our students emotional, social and academic behaviors. Our after school clubs, Service In Schools and Guitar groups, visited the North side Senior Center to boost morale, plant flowers to beautify the grounds and just spend a day to chat with the seniors. It is our job as educators to lead by example and show our students how important the surrounding community is to our future. Middle School 577 is also partnered with American Ballroom Theater, Mighty Milers, Young Runners, Urban Advantage, Unleashed, WMAC, Museum by Design, Middle School Baseball League, Service in The Schools, Brooklyn 0  Museum and the Brooklyn Botanical Gardens. These programs have given our students the opportunity to learn experience and take an active role in our community. Our students become active community service members from grade 6. We strive to create responsible young adults in all our students to make them college and career ready. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Middle School 577 has a population of 19 English Language Learners. Our ENL are comprised of 2 Entering, 4-Transitioning,and 12 Expanding students. Instruction will be provided by our highly qualified ENL teacher. Besides the push-in model, Ms. Spinosa provides an individualized pull-out program to our entering, emerging and transitioning ENL's, and to those who need the more structured attention. All of our staff members take pride in their work and more importantly get to know their students. We personally believe that students strive and push for success because of the trusting relationships they have built with our staff members. Our SWD range from students who are identified in a 12:1 class, ICT or as least restrictive as SETTS. ALL of our subgroups require differentiated instruction so all students can understand the text, discussion or written assignment. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to the School Quality Guide for the 17-18 school year, MS 577 made the most progress in the area of Rigorous Instruction. It also noted that we have scored the lowest in the Framework in the area of Strong Community Ties. We will be focusing on strengthening of Community Ties for the 18-19 school year. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 14K577 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 502 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 14 14 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 36 35 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 53.0% % Attendance Rate 50.8% % Reduced Lunch 3.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 56.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 37.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.25 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 56.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO YES N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 50 50 95.8% 2.0% 19.1% 4.6% 1.8% 0.2% 2 13% 5.3 50.3% 64% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The goal for rigorous instruction was developed through the analysis of the school performance dashboard, school quality guide student reflections, teacher reflections and the 2017-2018 school quality guide. In addition, the culture of the classroom has benefited our school community due to increased student ownership and their responses to being great leaders.Schools Quality Guide Our school's strengths that are relative to the framework are seen in the results of the school quality guide in the area of rigorous instruction and collaboration . From the 2017 School Performance Dashboard we are highlighted for rigorous instruction. While noted in our Oct. 2017 P.P.O. written feedback, Superintendent Winnicki stated, "While reviewing planning artifacts, our instruction goal for using student and data to refine curriculum and units of study was transparent". Our priority for next year is to strengthen effective strategies by increasing the number of PCT teachers and student leaders throughout each classroom. We will continue to work diligently to strengthen our students problem solving skills, writing, and their analysis of text including citing evidence. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our 6th grade students consistently use 3 strategies (Close Reading, R.I.C.E. and C.U.B.E.S) in all subject areas to improve overall with their comprehension and critical thinking skills on summative exams. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers will participate in two teacher team weekly meetings scheduled by the assistant principal. Teachers will share the strategies that have been successful in their classes and invite teachers to observe the success of their students. Teacher will analyze student writing and offer constructive feedback on how students could improve by using R.I.C.E. Teachers of science and social studies Sept. 2018-June 2019 Vertically align teacher team meetings between ELA, SS, Science and Special Education. The teams will meet together to devise cohesive plans of rigorous instruction that will strengthen our students skills with analyzing text and citing information to increase student performance on summative exams ELA, SS Science and Special Education Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 1x per week The assistant principal will implement and oversee by observing and supporting the needs of the team. ELA Peer Collaborative Teachers, Data Specialist, Department AP & Principal Observations, teacher reflections and collegial feedback Teachers will be provided with an inter-visitation schedule to offer constructive feedback to their colleagues. They will also complete a "take away" card to be utilized within their own plans. All teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 1x per week ELA Peer Collaborative Teachers, Department Chair, AP & Principal Observations, teacher reflections and collegial feedback ELA Peer Collaborative Teachers, Science lead, & Principal Review of lesson plans during team meetings, I.C.T. teachers, and related service team providers will join the appropriate team meetings to develop modified plans with the general education teachers to support the 3 effective strategies students will be using for writing. They will work together on differentiated instruction for all learners. Sept. 2018-June 2019 1x per week All related service, ICT teachers and General Education Teachers 4 All teachers will receive professional development in the area of Action Research that is linked to Making Thinking Visible, Culturally Responsive Teaching and Character Development. They will be receiving Culturally Responsive Teaching and The Brain: Promoting Authentic Engagement and Rigor Among Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Students for our first book study of the year. observations and teacher feedback All teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal & Assistant Principal 1x per week 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September during the meet and greet, the staff will host grade level and department level workshops to inform the parents of the expectations of the rigorous instruction, new writing curriculum and advanced math and ELA courses that will be implemented within all of our classrooms. The Peer Collaborative Teachers will lead the teachers in organizing the materials for each workshop. Our attendance teacher will use our global communication system to inform the parents of the dates and times of the workshops. The Assistant Principal will utilize the Jupiter Grades system to email, text and send alerts for pertinent information regarding the workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The teachers will analyze the reflections from teachers and students. Furthermore the teachers will study the adjusted lesson plans, student feedback and formative and summative assessments from the previous sessions to determine the impact it had on student achievement. Teachers will use exemplars from previous units to show the students. The PCTs will work with the department chairs to dissect the work and host workshops for the teams to fully understand the underlying reasons for this certain action research. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019 students will use the 3 strategies while taking Benchmark #2 in Math and ELA then the results will be compared to determine if we had success in using consistent strategies to improve comprehension and reading skills. Mini assessments will be used each month to check for understanding. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 5  Mid-year formative assessments, State Scores, Performance Series Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the 2017-2018, we have been noted to have great success in the area of supportive environment. According to the School Dashboard our supportive environment was given a score of 4.03 which is signifies we are a high impact school. Furthermore, the written feedback on our P.P.O. from Feb. 2018 in the area of 1.4 learning environment, Dr. Best stated, "Teachers meet to discuss students in an individualized way as a means to creating the best learning environment for each student. This priority need goal derived from the students responses in School Quality report to strengthen the relationships between classroom teachers, students, parents and the overall community through culturally responsive teaching and by us being a third year Leader in Me school. . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all administrators, staff, teachers and students will deepen their understanding of the critical connection between cultures present in our school community to fully develop a culturally responsive school. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A professional learning session will take place in August to review the results of the Learning Environment Survey with an emphasis on Supportive Environment. The surveys will be completed and analyzed with our students during their advisory periods. In addition, the Leader In Me habits and strategies from the action research project (Culturally Responsive Classroom) will be embedded in the lessons of advisory and become the cornerstone for increasing our supportive environment results. School Staff & Administrators June 2018-June 2019 All teachers, advisors and the administrative team School Staff & Administrators Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, advisors, and students As we continue to promote a positive environment in our school, we will celebrate those students who have mastered gained the most recognition on their Character Card. Positive rewards are distributed each time an individual goal is met Students who are noted to be exhibiting the Leader in Me habits daily Weekly/monthly Grade advisers, AP and Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator, Guidance Department and staff will continuously communicate with the families to ensure parents are aware of the components of Learning Environment Survey. The Parent Coordinator will host a workshop to ensure parents are aware of our results from 17-18 and our action plan to increase our areas of weakness. In addition, our PTA will work closely with our team to engage the parents in interactive workshops and support them with materials that are a viable resources for home activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 8  The grade advisors will have an advisory period with each of their classes once per week. Per-session for after school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In September 2018,December 2018 and February 2019 the students will complete supportive environment mock surveys and a reflective feedback form for the teachers to dissect, and review the results with the students to ensure awareness of questioning and create a plan to strengthen relationships between staff, parents and students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Compilation of results from mock surveys reflective responses from students and teachers Professional learning session agenda for supportive environment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. MS 577 has developed a strong commitment to collaboration (including peer collaboration), action research and professional learning. We received a score of 99% on our 17-18 School Quality Guide in the area of peer collaboration. Our students, staff, teachers and administrators trust each other. It has been noted that all areas of trust we had a positive result of 95% on the 17-18 school quality guide. The priority need is to create a calendar of professional learning opportunities that intertwines action research to enhance our collaborative learning groups. For the 18-19 school year, our action research learning projects will focus on Culturally Responsive Teaching and The Brain Zaretta Hammond, and Making Thinking Visible by Ron Ritchhart and Visible Learning for Teachers, John Haddie. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all pedagogy will have participated in at least three cycles (6-weeks each START DATE Oct 15, 2018) of action research to develop practices that will strengthen our collaboration and impact student achievement. Progress monitoring will take place throughout each cycle, with the culminating project to be presented to the entire staff. In addition, we will monitor by observing the implementation of the research within the target groups. Data will be collected every two weeks by our PCT teachers for further evaluation. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Cross subject teacher team meetings will meet twice per month to analyze student work, dissect and analyze data and share best strategies in the classrooms. The teams will discuss strategies that work with certain learners and are flexible to use in their own classrooms. During Monday Professional Learning Sessions we work in 6 week cycles of 3 sessions. Our teachers decide will be studying the three main books which were selected in June from the staff. within their own subject areas. . The teachers will dig deeper into research to prove or gain knowledge about their topic and then implement for evidence. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept 2018-June 2019 All departments and grade teams Peer Collaborative Teachers, Teacher leaders of each department/grade advisers S.I.T. Meetings-During our School Improvement Team meetings we address the needs of our I.E.P students, ENL, and sub-groups. Our special education team works with our general education teachers during planning. Planning is the key factor in student engagement. We individualize our plans or all our students according to their learning styles and their culture. All related service providers, assistant principal, principal Sept. 2018-June 2019 I.E. P. Teacher/Principal Action-Research based learning will take place in 6-week cycles. . It is extremely important to have teacher voice within the learning time. Our teachers strive to learn new strategies and are excited to share the successful ones with their colleagues. All departments and grade teams Sept. 2018-June 2019 U.F.T. Chapter Chair/U.F.T. Committee/Principal and Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. MS 577 has led the way with Student Led conferences for the past 7 years. Our incoming parents will be invited to a workshop hosted by our parent coordinator and 6th grade team in early October that will give full disclosure to the procedures for the Student Led Conference days. Our open door policy has made it possible for our parents to collaborate with our team and plan parent activities for the year. The SLT parent members/Our Student Lighthouse Team will be the core group that will disseminate information at PTA meetings and monthly student assemblies. The PTA executive board will provide pertinent information to the stakeholders of the MS 577 community through emails, phone calls, text messages and social media. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 1  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduled Collaborative Inquiry Meetings (twice weekly) Schedule Monday inter-visitations with district 14 schools Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. After every cycle of inquiry, the groups will present and analyze their findings of their targeted students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Minutes from team meetings school-wide spreadsheets for weekly formative assessments Cover sheets with benchmarks Item skills analysis from benchmarks Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After carefully analyzing the responses from the 17-18 School Quality guide, PPR score 17-18 and 2017 School Dashboard results, we have been deemed highly effective in the area of Effective School Leadership. We were rated at 95% in the area of Inclusive Leadership on the School Quality, Instructional Leadership at 99% and an overall score of 4.19 which is is .61 higher than the city average. The need to distribute the leadership will be developed though the Teacher Pathways program for the 2017-2018 school year. This year we will have 4 Peer Collaborative teachers, as opposed to 2 from last year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, MS 577 will continue to foster distributed leadership through the expansion of teacher leaders in all three areas of academics, social, and emotional aspects of our students. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All teacher leaders will be involved with planning sessions during the months of July and August. Teachers,students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Administrators, & teachers Selected teacher leaders will be offered professional development in their specific subject areas. . Teachers Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Administrators, Teachers & Leader in Me training coach Team leaders will meet vertically twice monthly with school leaders to discuss the effectiveness of school wide systems Teacher Leaders Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrations & Teacher Leaders Teachers will be selected by their colleagues during June planning. Expectations and goals will be set together with the administration to provide the most effective leadership to our teams. All teachers July 2018-June 2019 Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Each year in June the administration and staff host an incoming 6th grade parent night. The workshop outlines the dynamics of the school and allows for parents to join our team and become involved from the very beginning od their child's middle school years. The PTA is an integral part of our team. They are committed to keeping the lines of communication open with all parents. PTA meetings are engaging to all parents. Each month the PTA and grade team will meet to plan for the upcoming meeting. Parents are seen as partners. Our SLT team will add our student lighthouse team as partners during every other month's meetings. A In working in conjunction with the wellness division, I have made it a priority to assist with disseminating information about health and wellness to our community. The PTA board will work hand and hand with our wellness consultant to ensure our parents are getting pertinent information about their adolescent children. The many hot topics that will be presented are bullying, nutrition, stress and tension and raising self-esteem workshops are just a few topics to mention. We will also offer workshops in leadership development so they could transfer the skills to their home lives. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 4  Schedule for common planning time Purchase professional books to be an effective leader yet a colleague Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Each month we will month parent surveys and questionnaire's that are a reflection of any parent engagement activities that take place in the given month. In December 2018, the wellness consultant and the parent coordinator will analyze the attendance and parent reflection surveys that measured of growth in parent participation, leadership and parent driven ideas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Effective practices seen through the observation process Teacher Leader/teacher reflections Overall progress of the weekly team meetings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. MS 577 Strong Family and Community Ties strengths are seen through the positive responses of School Quality Report and past Quality Reviews. The needs for this goal has been determined by the participation rate at our 17-18 PTA meetings. This is the second year we have been working towards raising parent involvement and we have seen a slight increase from 16-17 to 17-18 at our PTA meetings/events. Our goal is to increase parent engagement at PTA meetings by 50% from Sept. 2018-June 2019. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase our parent participation rate by 50% at parent engagement events. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers and students will devise a plan to participate in monthly family fun nights parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Department leaders will organize large scale performances During the 17-18 school year, our teachers have offered their thoughts to create a menu of ideas for family fun nights to increase parent participation. parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Each class will perform or display their model work once per year at a PTA meeting. teachers students Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Department Leaders, students and administration Teachers, Department Leaders, students and administration Teachers Administration, and PTA Executive Board Our department teams have offered to organize a math game night, science fair, book reading by genre, debate night with your child, etc. parents teachers students Sept. 2018-Sept 2019 Teachers & Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. St. Nicholas Alliance, Puerto Rican Family Institute, Beth Israel Community Center, Precious Life Interboro, Polish Slavic Credit Union, 94th Precinct Explorers, NYC Dept. of Health Consultant, Bellevue Hospital Center, Ackerman Institue for Family Therepy, St. Vincent's Services Mental Health Clinic Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Weekly planning time, professional learning books to promote parent participation, per session for after school practices Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. All teachers teams will have to complete the submission form to participate. The family fun night will be selected and based on the submitted application, We will monitor the number of parents at each monthly event through sign in sheets. The number of participating parents will be entered on a spreadsheet by month and then analyzed for growth. By February, we will have 50% more parents than we did in October. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. sign in sheets, surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8 Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Benchmark assessments Teacher observations Quick assessments Mathematics Benchmark assessments ELA teacher will decide group size Close Reading ELA NEWS Skill Based lessons Reciprocal Teaching Literature Circles Writing cycle Peer tutoring After school ELA CCSS skills Kahn Academy Math teacher will decide group size Lunchtime after school Lunchtime after school Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Teacher observations Reflex MathCastle Learning Quick assessments Science Benchmark assessments Individual instruction, Science website, reflex and Brainpop Teacher observations Quick assessments Living Environment Lab Prep Science teacher will decide the maximum number of students in a group Lunchtime after school 9 Social Studies Benchmark assessments Teacher observations Quick assessments At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher reports S.I.T. Meetings SS DBQ, Differentiated instruction through Glencoe, Brainpop SS teacher will decide the maximum number of students in a group Lunchtime after school Peer tutoring with peer evaluations in documents based essays/law cases Socratic Seminar Gallery Walk Brainpop, Kahn Academy, 7 Habits of a Highly Effective Teenage, Middle School Success, Young Woman's Lives Scheduled sessions during the day Social Worker, SAPIS, and guidance counselor will determine whether the groups will be small or one-to -one 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 3 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Free metro-cards, 100.00 allotment per student, supplies, uniforms, at-risk counseling, small group supports during lunch, big sister/big brother Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We have a minimal percentage of teacher turnovers, less than 1%. Our teachers have been a part of the MS 577 family since 2004-2005 school year. The few teachers who have left MS 577, left due to child care leave, family related issues or retirement. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). MS 577 provides high quality professional learning sessions during our Monday meetings, and our teacher team sessions. The teacher teams study student work based on the CCSS rubric to offer students quality feedback. The specific feedback will ensure that students understand their weaknesses, self-correct their work and see their own progress. Small group instruction is data driven by our benchmark assessments. Students work toward mastering the skills in which they show deficiency. We are building accountability in our students by using the student reflection template that is utilized across all subject areas. Benchmark assessments are given at the beginning (early Oct), middle (February) and at the end (May). We analyze the data and track progress throughout the year. MS 577 participates in NYC Wide Professional Learning and D14, professional learning workshops. Last year, we participated in the professional development series for Literacy Collaborative Design, The New Math Discourse Workshop, The Middle School Writing Project For the upcoming school year, we will be participating in teacher's College and the Leader in Me. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 3  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher voice is the center of decision making across all areas of MS 577. We have created Lead Teachers for each department. The Lead Teachers were solely selected by the teachers of the department. All our created teams (Instructional, MOSL, Department, Crisis, and Special Ed) members were selected with the UFT and teachers of MS 577. Assessments, Curriculum Adjustments, Incentive Trips,etc are all decided within the teacher teams. The selection of assessments are strictly done through our teachers. Once the assessment is selected, the teacher leaders meet with the instructional cabinet and present the assessment with evidence to why we should use the assessment. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 310,060 x 4 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 6  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 $3,182,403 x Section 6 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 5  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 14K577 Conselyea Preparatory School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students MS 577 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, science social studies, use of technology and the social emotional aspect of the adolescent ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 7  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, or the Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator, Mrs. Marchione, to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. Mrs. Marchione will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 8  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) MS 577, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 9  the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 0  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 1  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 14 School Name Conselyea Preparatory Borough Brooklyn School Number 577 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mrs. Masullo Coach Mrs. T Herrera/PCT ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. A. Spinosa Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Isca/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Mr. A. Villalba/Special Ed Related-Service Provider Ms. L. Katcher IEP Teacher Superintendent Mrs. A. Winnicki Assistant Principal Mrs. Stevenson Coach Mr. Scott Dalton/Math School Counselor Ms. Erin O'Donnell Parent Ms. Mercado Parent Coordinator Mrs. K. Marchione Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 4  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 506 Total number of ELLs 25 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.94% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Paste response to questions here: MS 577 utilizes a computer adaptive benchmark system for all students in ELA and Math. The Performance Series Assessment is given three times per year, Sept, January in late May. The data provides lexile levels, and it itemizes the reading and math skills that each individual student needs improvement. MS 577 also uses the MOSL exams to assess literary skills. All ENL's are included in all formative assessments, performance tasks, and teacher assessments. The data collected is analyzed by the teachers in conjunction with our ENL teacher to adjust and differentiate instruction for all students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 5  Teacher team meetings, cabinet meetings, and the PCT teacher and math teacher leader will assist in developing interventions for the ENL students. In addition, we will continue to study and participate in action research according to our data from 16-17 to ensure we are targeting the trends and areas of improvement. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate our program by students' progress as seen in the NYSESLAT, MOSL benchmarks, ELA and Math benchmarks, classroom observation and ELA/Math performance tasks. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Our ENL teacher participates in all teacher team meetings in all major subject areas. As the data is analyzed, the teams created differentiated plans for the students. Our ENL teacher provides a push-in service to all students which allows her to work directly with the students during the daily lessons. She also provides AIS services during lunch time and professional periods to those in need. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Paste response to question here: Our ENL students are progressing towards becoming proficient in their grade levels according to their lexile levels. Their lexile reading levels have shown slight increases over a year's time. The NYSESLAT shows that there was a general increase. Twelve of twenty five students have made gains within their levels. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Team meetings, S.I.T meetings, professional learning time and one to one conversations with staff Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ENL program will be delivered via push in with the core subject areas and pullout for identified skills. All ENL students are placed in block classes and travel with their class throughout the day. To ensure direct in-class instruction is rigorous we have created teacher team meetings for the ENL teacher to meet with the ELA and Math teachers to review data and create differentiated lesson plans. Our ENL teacher will review the results of our Multiple Intelligence Survey to get a better understanding of the learning styles of our ENLs. Once data is reviewed from the survey the multiple entry point strategies that serve our population will be incorporated into the lesson plans. All of our ELLs are programmed as per Part 154 found on page 31 of the reference guide. Freestanding English as a New Language (ENL) programs provide instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. Students in freestanding ENL programs can come from many different language backgrounds, and English may be the only common language among the students. As per CR Part 154, there are 2 types of ENL: • Stand-alone ENL is instruction to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. It is delivered by a certified ENL teacher. A student may not receive stand-alone ENL in lieu of core content area 6  instruction. • Integrated ENL is instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction. It is delivered by a dually certified teacher (ENL and a content area) or co-teaching by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies). Both methods of integrated ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. All ENLs and former ENLs up to 2 years after exiting ENL status must receive a minimum number of units of integrated ENL service. Students are always grouped ny their proficiency level. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The mandated instructional minutes drive the ENL teachers program. We analyze the minute structure for each student in each grade , then place them together in a class. Once placed in the class, the instructional minute time may differ therefore an individualized program will be created for the students. We program all of our ENL students into STARS. We cross reference NYSESLAT scores with our teacher programs. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in all our classrooms; therefore each ENL is learning Common Core standards within the block period of time. The ENL teacher uses support structures such as ELA News to have reading content material at a lower level. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ENLs take all tests in English, with mandated accommodations and modifications. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We differentiate instruction according to the students mandates and needs. The ENL teacher has portfolios and evaluation cover sheets for all students as evidence of learning. Our ENL students are grouped by proficiency levels. Instruction is focused on what modality the students have the lowest NYSESLAT scale score. Our entering ENA program emphasized vocabulary and writing so our ENLS could develop a stronger foundation of the written English language. Many intermediate ENLs have a strong focus on writing and essay organization and former ENLs have much of their ENL instruction based around subject content. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our teachers of ENL's-SWD's use reciprocal teaching, literature circles, and Socratic Seminars to provide academic content delivery and to assist in English Language development. The ENL teacher ensures that the students are receiving all mandated ENL units and that all their IEP accommodations are met. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 7  Our instructional focus for the ENL's-SWD students is to provide rigorous instruction in the content areas. The ICT teacher uses formative instruction throughout the daily lessons to track that the IEP goals are being reached and mastered. . Our push-in model will allow for the ENL teacher to scaffold the material so the students understand the content in the English language We use the same model for our lower performing students. Each year our priority is to meet the needs of all diverse learners. Our tight knit family environment allows for daily check-ins with our students by the ENL teacher. All students, including out ENLs are placed in the correct classes when the students schedules are formulated. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs include small groups of students who are identified through benchmark instruction or teacher assessments. Teachers build individualized instructional plans for theses students. Modified material is utilized to assist the students in understanding the curriculum. The differentiated instruction is also tailored by these assessments and strategies are infused in our daily lessons to promote success. Our students work in small groups in all subject areas. Teachers carefully monitor the targeted groups by conferencing and using formative assessment. Our targeted students also receive lunch time individualized instruction and peer tutoring. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Paste response to question here: In Math we have purchased Mathletics for our 6th grade students to support all students in the foundation of fractions and word problems. . In ELA, we have joined the Middle School Writing Pilot to increase our writing skills with more on demand writing from all students. for the upcoming year. In addition, we opted into the Passport Social Studies program for all three grades to enhance the social studies curriculum with additional primary sources and secondary sources. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The exclusive pull out model is being disband due to the high number of LTE's and new Part 154 regulations. We have 16 developing students out of 30 total. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students including our ENLs are granted the same access at MS 577. The ENL parents are notified in their native language if necessary. These programs include after school programs as well. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. CodeX and GoMath will be used for all students at MS577. All our units are looked at and modified to include scaffolding and modifications to materials. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ENLs have access to bilingual and english dictionaries, libraries in the home language, and electronic word translators. Only when applicable MS 577 uses version of tests in the students home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL teacher reviews all documentation well in advance to ensure all required services are met. The S.I.T team works with the ENL teacher to review and analyze all documentation. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? CodeX will be used for all students at MS577. Instructional programs such as performance series, Max Scholar and/or Reading Plus will be utilized. All our units are looked at and modified to include access to ELL using scaffolding and modifications to materials. 8  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The ENL teacher, parent coordinator and guidance department work together to create a packet of information which is than translated to the student's home language and distributed to the families. They are also invited to participate in new parent workshops on Tuesdays. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teacher actively participates in our research based professional learning time on Mondays where scaffolds for our ENLs are included in our agendas. In addition she participates in city-wide ENL workshops. She continue to see outside ENL workshops to strengthen her work for our students. 50% of the ENL teachers professional development is ELL focused. She attends any of the PD offered by the district. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The guidance department conducts adolescent workshops to our entire staff and includes how to handle some of the ELL specific difficulties, struggles that come with the language barrier. The guidance department meets with the ENL teacher during S.I.T. meetings to discuss any social concerns the ENL teacher has noticed in her students. The ENL teacher attends monthly workshops from NYC to further her expertise with transitioning. The ENL teacher actively participates in our professional learning sessions on Mondays. The researched based learning is divided by core subject area or grade. In addition to NYCDOE workshops, the ENL teacher participates in district wide professional learning activities when applicable. MS 577 adheres to all the PD regulations from CR Part 154. MS 577 provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. The ENL teachers keeps all copies of PD agendas, and a copy is placed in her folder in the main office. 9  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We will continue to host three ENL meetings for our parents. In September our ENL parents teacher will meet all the parents at the meet and greet. The students will invite their parents to the meet and greet through written invitation. The ENL teacher will use Talk Time Tuesdays to meet with parents on an individual basis, and she will organize parent workshops. continue to host hosts individual meetings as well. Progress monitoring will be done weekly, however the students will take the second benchmark In February and will analyze the data to ensure the students are making progress towards their goals. If translation services are needed, our dual language staff members will translate. If we are not able to provide the service, we use the translations and interpretation unit. We will be collaborating with district 14 staff to offer additional parent meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ENL parents are equally as involved with our school community as others. Information regarding events, or meetings are distributed to the students via backpack or through our Global Connect system, Jupiter grade system and phone calls by the parent coordinator. All parents are afforded the same opportunity to become involved in our school. ENL parents are invited to all PTA meeting, to all parent conferences, to curriculum night, to orientations, meet-and-greet night, family fun events etc. We are a totally inclusive school to all students. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Maria Masullo, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Maria Masullo Title Principal Karen Stevenson Assistant Principal Karen Marchione Parent Coordinator Anne Spinosa ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Mercado Parent Mrs. Isca Mr. Dalton Toni Herrera Mr. Villalba Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Erin O'Donnell School Counselor Alicja Winnicki Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Conselyea Preparatory Superintendent: Mrs. The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. On a yearly basis, Middle School 577 is proactive in providing parents with the necessary translation services. MS 577 promotes parent involvement and works hard to communicate with our families to reach ample parental involvement. All major correspondences sent home are in multi-languages. We have a diverse language population, our highest non-English speaking families communicate in Spanish. Therefore we have numerous Spanish speaking staff members that are available when translation is needed for meetings/conferences. We have a small population of non-speaking families. For these families we use the DOE services to provided families with the information needed to. During PTA meetings and parent teacher conferences we have two DOE staff memebers, who provode services to those families in need. Our school uses the available resources provided by the DOE to effectively communicate with all of our parents. Translation services are available based on the needs of the parent. We use the HILS, ATS, Emergency Contact Cards and conversations and observations with our parents to identify and accommodate our language translations. 3  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Middle School 577 utilizes the demographic data provided to us by the HILS report and the parents preferred langauge option in ATS. Based on the results, we utilize our resources from within our school community and the DOE. Middle School 577 parent population prefer Spanish, Polish and Arabic translation services. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Parent/student handbook, monthly calendar, daily correspondences, parent/teacher conferences, after-school programs, NYS testing calendar, MS 577 testing calendar, PTA news, monthly newsletters, SLT news and curriculum information. How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 4  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? MS 577 has an open door policy for all families. Throughout the school year we have many formal and informal face to face meetings with our parents. In September, we start with the NYC kick-off meet and greet. Our parent coordinator organized family fun activities, while our teachers create curriculum packets and year long calendars for their parents. As the progesses we offer student led conferences which take place three times per year, weekly workshops on Tuesdays, curriculum night, high school information night, weekly Tuesday parent meetings with our attendance teacher, IEP meetings, guidance counselor workshops and weekly individual parent meetings, parent coordinator small group workshops, etc 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 5   Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Parent Coordinator and Language Access Coordinator will track the parents' satisfaction through a parent survey and follow-up phone calls. 6 
