2018-19 RENEWAL SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (RSCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 19K583 School Name: MULTICULTURAL HIGH SCHOOL Principal: ALEXANDRA HERNANDEZ 2018-19 RSCEP-R 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Multicultural High School 19K583 School Number (DBN): 331900 9-12 999 Jamaica Ave. Brooklyn, NY 11208 718-827-2796 Phone Number: 718-827-3970 Fax: Alexandra Hernandez Ahernandez7@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Geographical District: 19 Cypress Hills Local Development Corporation Email Address: Alexandra Hernandez Barbara Moronta Oliver Prince Juan Jimenez Alexandra Hernandez TBD District Information Janice Ross Superintendent: 1396 Broadway, Room 110 Brooklyn, Ny 11221 Superintendent’s Office Address: jross11@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-455-4635 Phone Number: 718-455-4684 Fax: Brooklyn North FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald 2018-19 RSCEP-R 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston St., Room 501 Brooklyn, NY 11201 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-225-5119 Phone Number: 718-935-4314 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with 2018-19 RSCEP-R 5  the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development 2018-19 RSCEP-R 6  The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 2018-19 RSCEP-R 7  how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 8   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Alexandra Hernandez Oliver Prince Jr. BethsaidaDevaux Joanne Celio MeloddyTorres Barbara Moronta Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 10  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Maria Verrilli Parent Parent Teacher Parent Parent Staff Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor 2018-19 RSCEP-R 11  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. Multicultural High School is a school for newcomers that have been in the country for three years or less and whose native/ primary language is Spanish.  Our mission for the school is to cultivate in each of our new learners of English the intellectual and cultural skills required for well-informed and innovative participation in the world.  Our program follows the Transitional Bilingual Model and the Dual Language Model.   We value biculturalism and bilingualism.    The common practices that illustrate these beliefs are engaging students in writing and speaking in the classroom. Some common strategies that promote speaking and writing include Cornell notes, MEAL writing outline as well as the SCUBA annotation strategy. We are committed to aligning our curricula to Advanced Placement Coursework and Standards. Our curricula is currently aligned to the CCLS. We commit to specific focus standards across disciplines that are in turn connected to the NYS language progressions to support our students multiple entry points. We believe in translanguaging and as a bilingual program, our belief systems are centered on access to knowledge and culturally sensitive pedagogy, through the integration of the home language in everything that we do. As a community, we review assessment data to make strategic decisions regarding instructional shifts across grades and subject areas. Teachers are provided with instructional coaches to support their development and refinement of curriculum and academic tasks. Teachers then use the data from the assessments to support decisions around scaffolds, materials, and groupings.  The impact of this work has been an increase in student writing products and shifts in teacher practice. The student work is often evaluated through the lens of a student to reflect and improve teacher practices and student understandings. It is also important to note that a quarter of our student population is identified as Students with an Interrupted Formal Education (hereinafter SIFE) or students with two or more years of gaps in their academic learning in a formal educational setting. As such, one of the challenges we face is helping those students learn to read, write, and communicate fluently in both their native language and English when they are coming over with elementary levels of content knowledge and skills, and are expected to pass higher leveled State exams within a prescribed time. In addition, we are focusing on supporting our students through trauma. Many of our students have faced trauma as a result of their experience as immigrants. It is critical for us to support our students socio-emotionally to support students on through their high school journey. We are partnering with Partnership with Children to further support our students. Through this partnership we will have a bilingual social worker and a restorative justice coordinator. The area in which we experienced the most progress has been around attendance under Effective Leadership from the Framework for Great Schools. We moved from 76 to 90 percent over the last five years. We have consistently instituted opportunities where we recognize students with attendance improvements by providing incentives like field trips and school swag. Our community is at the core of our success and thus we invest in cultivating relationships amongst all constituencies. As a result, we created multiple family events, community potlucks, random acts of kindness events, and college knowledge day. Other initiatives include: an incentive trip for students with a 95% attendance rate to Six Flags on Multicultural Day; identifying students who demonstrate trends in attendance and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 12  engaging them in a dialogue about what is preventing them from attending and what we can do to support them; implementing the Peer Group Connection where our 12th graders mentor our 9th graders during our extended day program; awards ceremonies; Student Town Halls by Grade Level; and a “Lunch of Champions” where we recognize students that have improved in both attendance and academics by content area. The area in which we still face challenges is centered on the severe gap in academic behaviors and socioeconomic circumstances faced by most of our students. In addition, the large amount of first generation over-aged students we receive and their families necessity and demand for them to generate income to support and sustain the household which takes first priority over the long term goal of acquiring a solid education with us to pursue a college degree and obtain and develop their careers instead of working minimum wage jobs. Over 30% of our population is over-age. Most of them need to work and have to leave school “early.” We’ve come to recognize that our students who do not have a strong support system or family unit generally lean towards employment and stay the minimum amount of time in school before going to work. That was why we reached out to establish an Adult Learning Program here to help strengthen and emphasize the importance of an education and selecting a career path from now. It’s also what partially prompted us to develop and integrate an ELT program as an essential part of our school day and culture prior to it being mandated. Over the years, We have been able to create and maintain partnerships that support our community in addition to the collaborative work we do with Cypress Hills Local Development Corporation, our partnered CBO, to ensure students are receiving high quality opportunities and support while at MHS. Please see below for a list of partnerships: Partners ● Global Nomads ● TEALS: Computer Science in Every Classroom ● World Science Festival ● College Now through LaGuardia Community College ● CUNY New York State Initiative for Emergent Bilinguals ● Curricuplan ● Datacation ● FKL AFJROTC ● FKL LYFE Center ● FKL North Shore/ LIJ School-Based Health Center ● FKL Office of Adult and Continuing Education - District 79 2018-19 RSCEP-R 13  ● FKL RAPP ● FKL School Food Program ● FKL SPARK ● FKL Student Success Center ● FKL YABC Good Shepherd Services ● Kingsborough Community College ● LACREA - Latin American Commercial Real Estate Association ● New York Historical Society ● Opportunities for Better Tomorrow ● Peer Group Connection ● Ramapo ● St. John’s University ● Urban - Art - Beat ● Urban Word ● 21st Century Grant We value our strong partnership with our CBO - Cypress Hills Local Development. They’ve developed our Student Success Center with the goal in mind to provide students access to academic and social/ emotional supports to be successful in high school. They have assisted in writing a number of grants including the 21st Century Grant. They also follow our students throughout the college application process sharing information with families and even go as far as following students into their years in college to ensure success. Funding to sustain programming has been a challenge because of enrollment trends. Our Expanded Learning Time Programs have been up and running since 2013. After five years of implementation, we can confidently say that the system works well for our students and our families. We found that simply offering an extended learning time option was not enough. Below is what we do as a community to provide more opportunities for students to be successful. a. Commitment to Graduation: ELT is mandated for all students that have not met their graduation requirements. Because our students have such tremendous gaps in their learning and sometimes in their schooling (ex: SIFE), we go to great lengths to inform parents of the importance of our ELT and our parents are very supportive of the additional time in school. It is part of the intake conversation with students come to our school and part of the “Journey to 2018-19 RSCEP-R 14  Graduation” conversation with we have with our families. In order to do this, we must have our programs, rosters and teachers set for Day 1 of school. If not, it simply does not work. b. Analyze Data: We review Regents data and enrollment data to make specific recommendations for individual students. All courses with the exception of the College Now Courses are offered during the 8th period (3:00 p.m. - 4:15 p.m.). College Now Courses are offered 0 period (7:20 a.m. - 8:20 a.m.). i. ELT begins the first day of school and it ends on the last day of school, no exceptions. ii. ELT is offered from Monday-Thursday every week. iii. We are in year 4 of a 21st Century Grant with our CBO - Cypress Hills Local Development Corporation. Together we collaboratively came up with a plan to support our students after school. Through the grant, we are able to have paid teaching artists and paid student workers/ Teaching Assistants who push into four of our classes. Please see ELT section for more details. c. Student Choice as Much as Possible: We pride ourselves in promoting student self-advocacy at our school, especially when it comes to all things related to Graduation. We program our students for 8th period (ELT) courses based on what they need, but if a student wants to take Math, instead of English, 9 out of 10 times, we say yes. We also give students a survey at the beginning of the year asking them what they would like to take during 8th period. Our Guidance Counselor then programs our students accordingly. d. Programmatic Structures: We program our ELT into STARS and it is part of our program, complete with attendance sheets and grades - Even if the course is not credit bearing. Teachers are asked to be ELT instructors during the summer and right before the school year begins. We treat it like a regular course. e. Safety: A positive intended outcome of our ELT has been a decrease in incidents outside the perimeter of our campus. Because our ELT ends at 4:15 p.m., students pick up their phones and then goto our Supper Program we have for them, they do not leave our campus until 4:25 p.m. By this time, all the other schools on our campus have been released and the possibility of altercations with outsiders dramatically decreases. It’s been ideal because our parents are happy that they know exactly where their children are especially if many of them are arriving home later in the evening. f. Informing Parents: As stated previously, we discuss ELT as part of the intake process to our school. We inform parents via letters with their children’s specific graduation needs and have family meetings to further clarify and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 15  discuss if needed. Our parents are supportive of the program because it keeps their children in a safe place for a longer period of time. g. Consistency: Committing to being consistent has been key. Next year will be our third year of having ELT and it takes a while for it to become part of the culture of a school. However, our approach has been successful. We don’t end programs for any reason, unless we do not need it based on the data. Multiple conversations are had both with students and parents about the importance of graduation, and why their participation is key to their success. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 16  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K583 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 243 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 1 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 9 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 1 1 School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 88.1% % Reduced Lunch 86.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 99.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.07 7% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 68% 50% 62.0% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A N/A N/A 2 89.9% 1.2% 1.6% 0.4% 0.0% 0.0% 2 21% 6.4 N/A N/A 72% 66% 55.1% 2% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A YES YES 2018-19 RSCEP-R 17  2018-19 RSCEP-R 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The strength of our school is our ability to modify curriculum by incorporating culturally relevant resources for our targeted English Language Learners. While our teachers integrate a system for summative and formative assessments, we recognize that our community must do a better job of tracking and make curricular shifts. As such, our teachers are developing and creating content based curriculum that connects the objectives to the National standards. An area where we can strengthen based on our School Performance Dashboard, is seeing that standards are met and reflected in all assessments for students. Another area would also include implementing a student reflection piece (portfolios, self-reflection) where students are more thoughtful in feedback and in their next steps towards solidifying the taking of ownership of their work and progress. Because our graduation rate has been consistently low and our students are new to the country, we have incorporated various academic supports to provide teachers with more opportunities to assess learning for students including literacy through the arts and utilizing the expertise of our Peer Collaborative and Mentor teachers to facilitate intervisitations and professional development amongst the staff. While our male graduation rate has increased over 20 points since last year (42% to 67%), we intend on addressing the low graduation rate Latino males versus the rise in performance by their female counterparts that reached 82% percent this past year (up from 72%) by partnering with UnidosUS to target our Latino male students and provide social/ emotional and educational supports throughout the year. We will be using Regents Results, school performance, dashboard, and report card pass rates. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 19  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? If teachers create language objectives aligned to relevant standards (Advanced Placement or Common Core) and explicitly teach effective writing and speaking strategies, then students will develop the ability to use evidence to support arguments in discussion and writing. We will promote our focus through thoughtful , targeted, and differentiated professional learning and team structures for our teachers. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? Our curricula is aligned to the CCLS and we are in the process of further alignment of all contents to Advanced Placement Standards. We will see a more targeted approach across classrooms by committing to specific focus standards across disciplines that are in turn connected to scaffolded language progressions to support our students multiple entry points. We believe in translanguaging and as a bilingual program, our belief systems are centered on access to knowledge and culturally sensitive pedagogy, through the integration of the home language in everything that we do. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? Our instructional program is developed based on the needs of our students. We partner with several organizations to support our school’s capacity to uplift our unique population. Our vision for college readiness begins as soon as our students enter our school. Upon entry, our students are taken through a “journey to graduation” conversation, alongside their parents and guidance counselor to map their educational trajectory at our school. The skills, habits, and behaviors all stem from having a clear understanding of the goal. Teachers utilize AVID strategies and curricula to support two major areas for students; responsibility and organization through the use of daily Cornell Notes in every classroom and student binders. Through various programmatic structures and partnerships, we provide all students opportunities to be career and college ready. Our instructional shifts provide students with experiences that strengthen their active and productive learning processes, which in turn equip them with the capacity to be successful after high school. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? The delivery of instruction will be centered around productive learning modalities, specifically speaking and writing. Pedagogy will look like a set of coherent practices around classrooms connected to school-wide focus standards and focus instructional practices. This is facilitated through a school-wide delivery of instruction based on how we believe students learn best. We have committed to the integration of school wide programming to include AVID, Engage NY 2018-19 RSCEP-R 20  Curriculum, Core5, Rewards, Imagine Math, Advanced Literacy Practices, Advanced Placement Capstone Standards, and the HMH Collections curriculum. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Teachers have multiple opportunities to engage students in different parts of the lesson to support individualized instruction adapted to our student needs. Interaction among students with their peers and classroom teachers allows staff and students alike to formative assess whether our students have acquired the content and skills necessary to be successful and move on to the next task. Our Language Proficiency Continuum (based on NYSESLAT, Regents, AP Capstone Rubrics) will be utilized to ensure appropriate scaffolds are in place to support students as they move from one level of proficiency within a standard to the next. For our students, this also means ensuring that texts are available for our students in the home language, Spanish. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Our assessments include benchmark assessments, common assessments across content, classroom level assessments connected to Regents Examinations, Advanced Placement Exams and NYSESLAT. Interim classroom level data is collected by teachers and teams via Performance Tasks and student work products to modify instruction. Teacher teams analyze the data and then make curricular shifts according to the needs of students. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) NYSITELL Diagnostic 9-12 Spanish LAB-R Diagnostic 9-12 PSAT Benchmark 10-11 Gates-McGinitie Reading Tests (GMRT) Benchmark 9-12 ●Use data for student groupings, guide instruction, and plan schools systems and structures. ●Students will perform at proficient or advanced levels. ●Use data for student groupings, guide instruction, and plan schools systems and structures. ●Students will perform at proficient or advanced levels. ●Achieve scores that will be considered for college acceptance or scholarship ●Consider programming for students ●The data provided by the GMRT will allow schedule targeted reading 2018-19 RSCEP-R 21  NYS Regents Summative 9-12 Mock Regents Benchmark/Summative 9-12 HMH Performance Tasks Summative 9-12 CORE 5 Benchmark and Summative 9-12 intervention periods for homogeneous groups of students ●The ELL population will be exposed to the exams and have multiple opportunities to pass them. ●Used as a baseline assessment for the June Regents. ●Opportunity for students to meet graduation requirements. ●Improve student achievement on CCLS aligned exams. ●Students will sit for the exams at least twice a year to reach standards ●The ELL population will be exposed to the exams and have multiple opportunities to pass them. ●Used as a baseline assessment for the June Regents. ●Opportunity for students to meet graduation requirements. ●Improve student achievement on CCLS aligned exams. ●Demonstrate understanding of content ●Improve student achievement on CCLS aligned exams. ●Demonstrate understanding of content ● The data provided will allow schedule targeted reading intervention periods for homogeneous groups of students ● Support student literacy levels based on individual performance. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, we will see a 3% improvement on Regents Completion rates by aligning classroom assessments to NYS Standards and relevant Advanced Placement Standards. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 22  Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Regents Pass Rates Year 2 & 3 Progress to Graduation Progress on Advanced Placement Assesments 2018-19 RSCEP-R 23  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) ● Analysis of Regent’s examinations. ● Use item analysis to modify instruction. All students particularly those not on track to graduation Regents Pass Rates September 2018-June 2019 Cabinet Inquiry, Department Team, Grade Team, Administration ● Project Based Assessment (One major project a trimester) ● Bi-weekly analysis of classroom level assessments and planning during department meetings ● Creating and planning interdisciplinary lessons with explicit consideration writing and Speaking ● Developing the Language proficiency continuum based on multiple rubrics ● Datawise, a Professional Development Support, will support us with writing All teachers Regents Pass Rates, Year 2 & 3 Progress To Graduation September 2018-June 2019 All departments, ENL department All teachers Regents Pass Rates, Year 2 & 3 Progress To Graduation September 2018-June 2019 All Departments Parent Workshops All Parents Progress to Graduation -Cornell Note Taking September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Staff How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Through the evaluation and feedback cycles of unit plans Through the evaluation and feedback cycles of unit plans Through the evaluation and feedback cycles of unit plans Parent Surveys 2018-19 RSCEP-R 24 All Students Progress to Graduation September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Students, Parent Coordinator Reviewing Student Progress Data Monthly, Weekly Meetings, and Summative Assessment Data -Padres Comprometidos Series Multi Reads Initiative -Double Block of ELA/ESL -Co-Teaching in ESL and Content -Core 5/PowerUp -Rewards -ENIL - Rigor -Wilson -D.E.A.R. -QTEL -Advanced Placement Capstone Standards 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June of 2019, six workshops will be conducted to empower parents with the curricular information and recommended at-home supports needed to best support Regents Completion rates. Our parent coordinator will ensure that there is coordination between all relevant partners to provide parents with access to materials, strategies, and opportunities to support their children at home. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc.  Literacy Department, Math Department, History Department, Science Department, Team Leaders and Administrators  Principal, 1 Assistant Principal, Director of School Renewal and Teacher Coaches.  Teachers  Guidance Counselor  Funding for Enrichment Partnerships 2018-19 RSCEP-R 25  Funding for Expanded Learning Time   Circular 6 SBO to allow for multiple circular 6 activities  Multi-Session schedule to support expanded learning (0-8 periods, 1 hour periods)  Advanced Placement Training for Teachers  Teacher Leadership  Per-Diem and Training Rate funds to cover teachers when out on PD, specifically for Rewards, AVID, WITSI and Materials.  Upgrade Technology Resources Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, we will evaluate the alignment of classroom assessments to January Regents Scores by classroom data and Regents Results. In February 2019, we will increase the overall Regent's Pass Rates by 2%.  Compare Regents Scores across the different administration periods, January, June and August, and review item analysis trends to identify gaps in learning to adjust curriculum.  Utilize common planning time to modify curriculum based on assessment at least twice a marking period  Teacher Performance on Evaluation supported by observations and targeted interventions (June of 2019)   Monthly Professional Development Committee Meetings to ensure professional development is aligned to Six Teacher Leader Meetings throughout the year to monitor progress, data and instructional practices student and teacher need  Weekly Professional Development aligned to the needs of the community.  Conduct Regents Predictions based on student past performance  Unit Plan Feedback and Curricular Modifications six times per year  Principal and Assistant Principal monitor teacher level observation data to adjust professional development and differentiated support for individual teacher  Weekly Multi Reads Team Meetings  Monthly "Multi Reads" progress monitoring Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  MHS Unit Plans and Unit Plan Rubric/ Evaluations  Teacher Observations/ Evaluations in Advance  Danielson Indicators  MHS Instructional Interaction Database  Regents data/ Pass Rates 2018-19 RSCEP-R 26  Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Our school, which we describe as a family, offers staff and students alike, to provide supports that extend beyond the classroom and assist with socio-emotional leads during the transition from their home countries to the U.S. While there has been a strong focus on those areas especially in lieu of more recent rhetoric and acts that negatively impact our community, our priority for this year will target improving our Math Regents scores which align to the supportive environment, rigorous instruction, and collaborative teaching under the Framework for Great Schools. Our specific focus will target 9th Latino grade students taking the Algebra Regents since as of now 50% of active students have passed the Algebra Regents . The primary data we'll use to analyze and adjust steps moving forward will come from our Regents reports, the New Visions Sorter, and in class assessments. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 28  We want our community to describe our school as Family. A place where students get the support that they need and are able to develop lifelong skills that go beyond academic performance. Our CBO partnerships enhance the academic experience of our students by providing services that we simply cannot offer during the regular instructional program. Through our CBO, we will hire a number of tutors to push into the classroom to support instruction. We're also going to hire a third Math teacher to support smaller class sizes for more targeted instruction and supports. Each of the math teachers will have a Math coach. Students that arrive below grade level will also have an opportunity to catch up to grade level work with access to remedial online (TTM) learning built into the day. We recognize that transitioning to a new country and having to learn a whole new language can be overwhelming which is why we also adopted the Peer Group Connection (PGC) Program out of the Center for Supportive Schools. This program enables us to support our school leaders by training them to become mentors to our 9 th grade students who are transitioning from middle school or out of the country. We approach support for our students through multiple avenues. We have two guidance counselors, a dean, PGC and establish an environment of respect and rapport amongst all students to ensure that every student is known by an adult. Counseling occurs at our school as needed, but there are key moments that we are sensitive to in support of ensuring that our students are emotionally healthy. We make recommendations for counseling after intake, during parent meetings and during one on one guidance meetings depending on the student and their needs. We measure social-emotional development through attendance, student course pass rates in conversations with teachers and PGC students as well as both internal and external health based organizations. We utilize attendance data and scholarship data (students who failed more than one class) to intervene and support our students by partnering with families to make recommendations and take appropriate action on a case by case basis. We are further expanding our socio-emotional support structures by engaging Partnership with Children as our primary Mental Health Partner. Through this partnership, we will have a dedicated bilingual social worker and a restorative justice coordinator. This will allow our community to approach the needs of our students through a tiered approach. In addition to this, we are expanding our Men of Action program to the tenth grade students. Students will meet once a week with a set of college mentors from Kingsborough Community College to discuss relevant issues in their development as young Latino males. Some of the workshops will address identity exploration, dating, and dealing with trauma. If students are in need of additional social-emotional supports, there are also case management referrals and wraparound services for students facing challenges. Community Service and Field trips are also embedded into our program to help support and enhance their learning experiences. Lastly, we are introducing the UnidosUS Escalera program to our 9th grade students as a means of improving our retention and graduation rate by focusing on educational and career outcomes. The Escalera curriculum is culturally and linguistically responsive and addresses key strands of the Common Core State Standards. Experiential learning activities will complement classroom learning with a college and career focus. These types of activities include, but are not limited to, field trips to area colleges, career shadowing days, summits, panels, and conferences. Similar to the Men of Action Program, there is a case management piece built into the curriculum. Each student will receive one-on one attention to address issues students may be facing in the program or other areas of their lives. Internships will allow students to explore their interests and practice basic job skills, such as clerical, customer service, professional etiquette, and communication. The program is intended to follow the students for two years. However, we would like to see it through all four years. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner AVID CBO Focus to close the achievement gap by preparing all students for college readiness and success in a global society 2018-19 RSCEP-R 29 UnLocal Legal Services Creative Classroom Solutions Cypress Hills Local Development Corporation Global Nomads Northwell Health Peer Group Connection TEALS WANY World Science Festival Kingsborough Community College To provide high quality legal representation and related services to people who cannot afford to retain an attorney. we provide workshop, coaching and institute experiences guaranteed to help build teacher capacity and create Best Practice Institutions. to build a strong, sustainable Cypress Hills and East New York, where youth and adults achieve educational and economic success, secure healthy and affordable housing and develop leadership skills to transform their lives and community. is an international non-profit organization that fosters dialogue and understanding among the world’s youth. Supports the emotional and physical health for our young people on campus helps schools enable and inspire young people to become engaged leaders who positively influence their peers. TEALS (Technology Education and Literacy in Schools) helps high schools build sustainable computer science programs by pairing trained computer science professionals – from across the tech industry – with classroom teachers to team-teach computer science in high schools is an Emmy Award-winning television show created to help immigrant New Yorkers practice English while informing them of the city’s resources. gathers great minds in science and the arts to produce live and digital content that allows a broad general audience to engage with scientific discoveries. is partnering with us by way of their Mens Resource Center to encourage college going culture amongst our young men and mentorship. How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? Our CBO in partnership with our school has created a family engagement plan based on Epstein's model of Family Engagement and Karen Mapp's 5 phases of family engagement to target and support parents through differentiated workshops. Through several iterations of parental feedback last year, our parents articulated the need for more mental health support and opportunities to meet after 6 p.m. Subsequently, our programming has been adjusted to support the needs of our families. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June of 2019, we hope to improve our Algebra Regents pass rates by increasing the percentage of students who have passed the Regents by 10%. Actions needing to occur include reviewing, revising, and aligning units and lesson plans to the common core curriculum; encourage more opportunities be taken for professional development; plan in vertical teams; offer math supports after school and again on Saturdays to students; hire TA's through our CBO to push into classrooms to work with the students and assist in parental outreach; and both continue and develop programs that will promote acceptance and excellence. All of theses things will occur from September to June. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 30  Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Graduation Rate Progress to Graduation Years 2 & 3 Attendance 2018-19 RSCEP-R 31  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Men of Action Program Male Students, Cohort W and V Graduation Rate, Progress to Graduation Year 2 & 3 September 2018-June 2019 ELT Teacher, CBO Staff How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Student Surveys, Student Attendance, and Credit Accumulation A change in approach with our 9th grade students. Math Teachers Graduation Rate, Progress to Graduation Year 2 & 3 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administration, coaches Math Teachers Graduation Rate, Progress to Graduation Year 2 & 3 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administration, coaches A change in approach with instruction. Professional Development to support questioning techniques, higher leveled thinking skills and different learning styles Analyze and develop activities centered around Mathematics that explore and investigate complex real world problems throughout the curriculum Targeted Parent Workshops; Padres Comprometidos Parents of Male Students Graduation Rate, Progress to Graduation Year 2 & 3 October 11, 2018, Parent Coordinator, Lead Teacher, Administration, CBO, PWC October, 18, 2018, October 25, 2018, November 8, 2018 A Change in approach with our 9th grade students. Multi Reads Male Students U & V Graduation Rate, Progress to Graduation September 2018-June 2019 ELT Teacher, AP, CBO Staff Progress on Books, change in attendance and credit accumulation 2018-19 RSCEP-R 32 All Students Graduation Rate, Progress to Graduation All Staff September 2018-June 2019 `Progress on Advance, Professional development programming, and attendance during Academic Interventions Actions needing to occur include reviewing, revising, and aligning units and lesson plans to the common core curriculum; encourage more opportunities be taken for professional development; plan in vertical teams; offer math supports after school and again on Saturdays to students; hire TA's through our CBO to push into classrooms to work with the students and assist in parental outreach; and both continue and develop programs that will promote acceptance and excellence. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. By June of 2019, six workshops will be conducted to empower parents with the curricular information and recommended at-home supports needed to best support their students. We will be using the Padres Comprometidos Curricula. Our parent coordinator will ensure that there is coordination between all relevant partners to provide parents with access to materials, strategies, and opportunities to support their children at home. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Literacy Department, Math Department, History Department, Science Department, Team Leaders and Administrators ● Principal, 1 Assistant Principal, Director of School Renewal and Teacher Coaches. ● Teachers ● Guidance Counselors ● Funding for Enrichment Partnerships ● Funding for Expanded Learning Time ● College Now 2018-19 RSCEP-R 33  ● Advanced Placement Training ● Circular 6 SBO to allow for multiple circular 6 activities ● Multi-Session schedule to support expanded learning (0-8 periods, 1 hour periods) Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  We will be reviewing credit accumulation the first week of December 2018 and Regents Pass rates the First week of February 2019.  Compare Regents Scores across the different administration periods, August 2018, January, June and August 2019, and review item analysis trends to identify gaps in learning to adjust curriculum and there will be evidence of progress as evidenced by credit accumulation.  Utilize common planning time to modify curriculum based on assessment at least twice a marking period  Engage in family meetings targeting 9th grade students  Principal and Assistant Principal monitor teacher level observation data to adjust professional development and differentiated support for individual teacher Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  In February, we will be re-evaluating our progress to graduation. Our current progress to graduation rate for Cohort U is 59% we hope to be at 70% by February 2019, as evidenced by credit accumulation and Regents Pass rates.  Graduation Rate  Progress to Graduation Year 2 & 3  Attendance Rate Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X X X X 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Our strength as a community is our ability to maximize resources to support our student needs. We utilize common planning time in multiple configurations to foster collaboration amongst teachers and to support the mission and vision of our school. This year, we will be using the Peer Collaborative and Mentor Teachers to facilitate Professional Development and teacher supports. Another area we would like to further develop is to strengthen our units and curricular plans, aligning them to the Language Progressions and developing the scaffolds used to support our English Language Learners. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? Our vision for collaborative teaching is centered around ensuring that there is instructional coherence across classrooms. This will be possible by committing to focus standards and the related language progressions. During our Common Planning Time, our teachers will be unwrapping targeted common core learning standards which align to NYSED language progressions and curricula. The school is organized to support teacher collaboration through the creative use of resources and scheduling. We have programmed all teachers to engage in Circular 6 activities during our students’ lunch period and have submitted a SBO in collaboration with our UFT to have split circular 6 activities. Our teaching program is designed to serve students new to the United States who are learning English. We help students learn to read, write, and communicate fluently in English while also providing opportunities to maintain and strengthen their native language. We believe native languages, cultures, and families are instrumental in creating authentic, collaborative experiences for all within our school community. Students will use what they learn at Multicultural High School to become successful academically and professionally; advocating for themselves, their families and their 2018-19 RSCEP-R 35 community. Thus, our underlying principles influencing the overall planning and preparation revolve around both content and student understanding and abilities. Teachers meet in both horizontal and vertical configurations to determine areas of need and plan accordingly. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? Our school engages in a cabinet inquiry process in which we thoughtfully consider the areas necessary for instructional growth and the ways in which we can address these areas to support our teachers. Through targeted data review and professional learning cycles, the cabinet makes decisions that inform professional development and team focus. We will be committing to Data wise across all teams. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? The collaboration within teacher teams in centered around the focus standards. If teachers are collaborating around the same focus standards and related language progressions, this will facilitate more targeted planning sessions and improve authentic collaboration. Through this collaboration, teachers will have the same lens by which to review student work and will assist each other with refining curriculum. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? By supporting focus standards, collaboration within and across teacher teams is seamless and connected to student outcomes. The focus standards and related language progressions support teachers in framing their dialogue and sharing best practices across classrooms. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Intent Performance Based Writing Tasks To establish a baseline for writing for all students to understand what the academic needs and demands are for each student. Regents Exams To understand what parts of the free response sections of each exam can be developed for students with the intent to target instruction deliberately. Specifically the Algebra, Global History, and English Regents. School Surveys and Advance Data To identify trends in areas requiring school wide supports and concerns identified by the teachers for individual supports. To understand trends across classrooms and modify professional development accordingly. Teacher Inter-visitation Data Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 36 By June 2019, we will improve command of evidence and content analysis as measured by an average improvement on 1 rubric level across all writing rubrics (from an average 3.25 to 4.25). Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Graduation Rate Progress to Gradation Year 2 & 3 Regents Pass Rates 2018-19 RSCEP-R 37  Part 4 – Action Plan Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Progress to Graduation Years 2 & 3 September of 2018-June 2019 Creative Classroom Solutions, Administration, Teachers All students Progress to Graduation Rate Years 2 & 3 September of 2018-June 2019 Guidance Counselors, Teachers, and Administration All Teachers Progress to Graduation Rate Years 2 & 3 September of 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Lead and Model Teachers, Administration, Coaches All Teachers Progress to Graduation Rate Years 2 & 3 September of 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Lead and Model Teachers, Administration, Coaches Circular 6-To facilitate deep analysis of Regents Data to inform instruction in classrooms through various teacher team configurations. Specific research based strategies that include but are not limited to: Translanguaging, Data Driven Grouping and Instruction, Individual Conferencing, Collaboration with Guidance Counselors and Identifying students with specific needs, providing relevant supports. Creating and planning interdisciplinary lessons with explicit consideration of writing and speaking. Professional Development around English Language Learners, Multiple Entry Points and address all levels of ELL identification. How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Through teacher feedback via online surveys. Through teacher feedback via online surveys. Through teacher feedback via online surveys. Curricular adjustments will also show evidence. Through teacher feedback via online surveys. Curricular adjustments will also show evidence. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 38  Language Proficiency Continuum(HMH, AP Capstone Rubrics, Writing Scope and Sequence and Language Progressions). All Teachers Progress to Graduation Rate Years 2 & 3 September of 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Lead and Model Teachers, Administration, Coaches Datawise Meeting Framework Teacher Leaders Progress to Graduation Rate Years 2 & 3 September of 2018-June 2019 Administration, Teacher Leaders, Teachers, Guidance Counselor Through teacher feedback via online surveys. Curricular adjustments will also show evidence. New Inquiry framework designed to support our PD & work within teacher teams 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June of 2019, six workshops will be conducted to empower parents with the curricular information and recommended at-home supports needed to best support their students. Our parent coordinator will ensure that there is coordination between all relevant partners to provide parents with access to materials, strategies, and opportunities to support their children at home. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Principal, 1 Assistant Principal, Director of School Renewal and Teacher Coaches. ● Teachers ● Guidance Counselors ● Funding for Expanded Learning Time -2 Administrators and 6 teachers ● Lead Teacher and Model Teachers ● Metamorphosis Coaching ● Circular 6 SBO to allow for multiple circular 6 activities ● Multi-Session schedule to support expanded learning (0-8 periods, 1 hour periods) Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside X 21st Century C4E 2018-19 RSCEP-R 39  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019, our school will have gone through at least two cycles of datawise. ● Utilized common planning time to modify curriculum based on assessment, 6/12 times -- at least twice a marking period ● Reviewed of Units 3 times by the end of January based on in house unit evaluation ● Conducted 3/ 6 Teacher Leader Meetings to monitor progress, data and instructional practices ● Conducted monthly Professional Development Committee Meetings to ensure professional development is aligned to student and teacher need ● Regularly monitor teacher level observation data to adjust professional development and differentiated support for individual teachers by administration and PD Committee comprised of the Peer Collaborative and Mentor Teachers ● Regularly monitor student level "Multi Reads" data to make adjustments to PD cycles Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instruments of measure include the Unit Plans that have been evaluated against the unit evaluation rubric, PD Committee feedback, improvement in student writing on assessments connected to Regents and Academic Intervention, and teacher surveys after professional development cycles. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 40  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Our strength as a school is our ability to leverage resources to support our diverse needs as a community. We utilize systems and structures to organize our time and ways in which we monitor data (scholarship reports, Regent’s Pass Rates, Attendance, NYSESLAT Scores, and Enrollment). We need to improve the discussion techniques across all classrooms. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? We approach our vision for effective school leadership through the lens of addressing the goals and needs of our school, and then aligning resources accordingly. In addition to building capacity amongst teachers, it is important that any initiatives and programs are cultivated in a way in which programming is viable and sustainable. All teachers and departments set measurable goals at the beginning of the year that is connected to our mission, vision and SCEP. Goals are reviewed at least three times a year by the school’s leadership to ensure adequate progress is being made. Our multi-session schedule and expanded learning time lends itself to opportunities of various out of classroom 2018-19 RSCEP-R 41  interventions and outreach programs to support students that are in need of academic, behavior, Social Emotional Support and attendance intervention. Student and Teacher programs are created based on the needs of students and the strengths of teachers. With regards to conducting observations, we created and adhere to an observation cycle with set benchmarks for completion. If teachers need additional formative observations, those observations are conducted as needed. Teachers are provided with feedback within 15 days of the observation and feedback is always specific, generally accompanied with a strategy or intervention to improve teacher practices in the classroom that would best support our students. Feedback to teachers is then reviewed before the next round of observations is conducted to ensure that changes have been made to enhance the classroom experience for students. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? The focus this year is on sustaining, developing, and supporting teacher leadership through various models in our school. We will have a model teacher and a peer collaborative teacher to engage ]teachers in professional learning cycles. We plan on focusing on the the distributive leadership practices of our school with a commitment to building capacity of teachers. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? The mission and vision guides all decision making and initiatives at our school. It is regularly communicated through various meetings and observations, the professional development plan, calendar, staff handbook, and our staff bulletins. To ensure a strong partnership continues with our CBO’s, we intend to continue our frequent communications which include regular meetings, progress monitoring, SLT assessments, benchmark conversations, and strategic planning. The CBO partners will also collaborate with staff through frequent meetings with the guidance department and parent coordinator to ensure that students are receiving the socio-emotional and academic services they need. An evidence based system we use to ensure that goals and benchmarks are being met include Initial Planning Conferences, Mid-Year Conferences, and End of Year Conferences to ensure that individuals are progressing as it relates to goals. We also meet with teachers for pre and post observations to provide feedback. In addition to the observation process, we also support our instructional staff by evaluating assessments and discussing scholarship reports at least once a marking period as well as developing and supporting individuals based on each person’s areas in need of improvement. Collaborations with other constituents are determined by accordingly. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? We create opportunities for teachers to become involved through a variety of different ways. Teachers are welcome to participate in Cabinet Inquiry meetings, can be involved in various committees, will lead professional development or best practices dialogue. We will utilize teacher leaders to engage peers in conversations about shifting practice to improve outcomes for students and outcomes for themselves based on the Danielson Framework. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? Our parents are expected to be active participants in the decision making processes at our school. Through our family engagement plan, we create opportunities to engage in a variety of ways that span from Epstein's 6 types of parental involvement, Parenting, Communicating, Volunteering, Learning at Home, Decision Making, and Collaborating. Through 2018-19 RSCEP-R 42 our different opportunities for shared decision making and collaboration our school will surely have the input of all constituencies for betterment of our school community. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy 5-6 cycles of observations Teachers will receive feedback within 15 days. Feedback will be connected to the DanielsonFramework with special attention to how teachers are attending to language progressions for our ELLS. What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Danielson Professional Development, Cabinet Inquiry, Teacher Team Meetings Regent's Scores Professional Development, Cabinet Inquiry, Teacher Team Meetings NYSESLAT Scores Professional Development, Cabinet Inquiry, Teacher Team Meetings Teacher Surveys Professional Development, Cabinet Inquiry, Teacher Team Meetings Lead Teacher, Principal, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Assistant Principal, UFT Chapter Leader, Coaches, DSR, Teachers Lead Teacher, Principal, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Assistant Principal, UFT Chapter Leader, Coaches, DSR, Teachers Lead Teacher, Principal, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Assistant Principal, UFT Chapter Leader, Coaches, DSR, Teachers Lead Teacher, Principal, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Assistant Principal, UFT Chapter Leader, Coaches, DSR, Teachers How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? The master program is organized based on the needs of students. Teachers programs are organized based on the needs of students as well. We ensure that our teachers have the appropriate certification and have the capacity to teach our students in accordance with legal mandates. In addition, we ensure that our classes are viable and fiscally sound for the community. We promote college and career readiness through the creative use of resources and ensure that students are enrolling in these courses. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 43  By June 2019, our cabinet inquiry will engage in datawise cycles of inquiry to improve language proficiency (speaking and writing) across the school as measured by the NYSESLAT, specifically, moving our demographics from 85% ELL to 80% ELL. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Progress to Graduation Year 2 & 3 Graduation Rate n/a 2018-19 RSCEP-R 44  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Specific research based strategies that include but are not limited to: Translanguaging, Writing Strategies (MEAL), Individual Conferencing, Collaboration with Guidance Counselors and Identifying students with specific needs, providing relevant supports Datawise Meeting Framework Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Teachers Progress to Graduation All Year Consultants, Guidance Counselors, team, Teachers, Administration, Administration, Teachers, Teacher Leaders Progress to Graduation All Year ORS Coachers, Consultants, DSR, Teachers, Administration Professional Development to support College Early Awareness Initiatives All Teachers Progress to Graduation All Year Consultants, Teachers, Administration How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in students passing Regents exams. Utilize datawise to structure teacher team meeting agendas and inquiry process Utilizing data collected by the School Success Center and Early Awareness Program through our CBO to address and decrease concerns over the drop out rates and improve our college going 2018-19 RSCEP-R 45  Analyze and integrate NYSED Language Progressions All Teachers Progress to Graduation All Year Model Teacher, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Administration, Teachers Support teachers through inter-visitations All Teachers Progress to Graduation All Year Model Teacher, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Administration, Teachers English Language Learner Night All Parents of ELLs Progress to Graduation 2x per year Teachers, Administration, CBO, Guidance Counselor culture amongst lower grades. To ensure that all teachers, especially content based specialists, are utilizing the same writing focus standards and language progressions. To support a structure for distributive leadership and increase the capacity of teachers in their pedagogical capacity. To empower parents with knowledge about how students are progressing through Language Acquisition 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June of 2019, six workshops will be conducted to empower parents with the curricular information and recommended at-home supports needed to best support their students. Our parent coordinator will ensure that there is coordination between all relevant partners to provide parents with access to materials, strategies, and opportunities to support their children at home. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Principal, 1 Assistant Principal, Director of School Renewal and Teacher Coaches. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 46  ● Teachers ● Guidance Counselor ● Funding for Enrichment Partnerships ● Funding for Expanded Learning Time ● College Now ● Advanced Placement Training ● Circular 6 SBO to allow for multiple circular 6 activities ● Peer Collaborative Teacher and Model Teacher Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019, our school will have: ● Utilized common planning time to modify curriculum based on assessment, 6/12 times -- at least twice a marking period and will see improvement in credit accumulation and marking period grades. ● Reviewed of Units 3 times by the end of January based on in house unit evaluation ● Conducted 3/ 6 Teacher Leader Meetings to monitor progress, data and instructional practices ● Conducted monthly Professional Development Committee Meetings to ensure professional development is aligned to student and teacher need ● Regularly monitor teacher level observation data to adjust professional development and differentiated support for individual teachers by administration and PD Committee comprised of the Peer Collaborative and Mentor Teachers Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  The instruments of measure include the Unit Plans that have been evaluated against the unit evaluation rubric, PD Committee feedback, improvement in student writing on assessments connected to Regents, and teacher surveys after professional development cycles. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 47  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Our strength as a community is our ability to cultivate relationships with our families evidenced by their attendance at Parent teacher Conferences in comparison to our peer schools on campus, participants in programs, and the increase in parents sharing thoughts on the School Survey from 16 percent to 50 percent over the last three years. We would however, like to further support our families by providing services that are related to effective family transition into the country and school system such as housing and citizenship. We want to continue to communicate regularly with our families in support of our students graduating on time with a keen awareness around their plans after high school. We want to strengthen our outreach to extend beyond required interventions for students into activities and invitations at our school for our parents in support of the overall mission and vision. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? We take pride in our “open-door” approach to parents. Parents are always welcome to our school and we hope to enhance the welcoming environment that we have worked hard to cultivate over the years. We will welcome parents by ensuring that there is a space available in the main office for them to engage with parent volunteers before meeting with members of the community regarding all aspects of their students’ lives. School safety will also receive cultural sensitivity training at the beginning of the year from one of our CBO's and will be reminded of the expectation to request program cards as students exit the campus before 4:00 p.m. Our school provides various workshops and individual /small group meeting opportunities for parents so that they understand the needs of their children as it relates to graduation. We believe that by empowering both the family and the student, they can collectively make 2018-19 RSCEP-R 48  sound decisions about next steps. Through conversations with families, we learn a great deal about family history and the unique circumstances that influence our students. We will continue to engage parents through phone calls, mailings, meetings and home visits. One of the things we are going to create with our CBO will be a community space in addition to the office space we will create for our families. With regards to adult education offerings provided to our families, we intend on continuing our work with the Adult Learning Program brought to the campus and WANY program. We also hope to have legal workshops to educate families around knowing their rights in this country regarding the immigration and criminal justice system. Families will be able to learn and understand student data and progress through regularly scheduled conversations with teachers, access to Skedula, guidance counselors and Parent Coordinator Workshops. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? The hallmark of our school is to create a second home for all of our families. Our office space is open, welcoming and has seating for families to feel comfortable. We also ensure that there is at least one Spanish Speaking person available at all times to engage with families. In addition to these structures, we provide translation at family events and even host events in Spanish because 100% of our families are Spanish Speaking. As part of the Community School Initiative, we have a dedicated family spaces on the 2nd floor, both private and public. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Through our partnership with FACE and community schools, parents will have various opportunities to provide feedback and leadership opportunities at our school. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? Through the creation of our family engagement plan, we approach family engagement in a holistic way, using Epstein's model for parent engagement. Not only are teachers and staff in regular communication with families, they are also present at family events. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Community School Forum English Language Learner Night Workshops Meetings To introduce families to wrap around services. To discuss individual student progress with learning language. To address underlying issues affecting a large percentage of our families To schedule meetings as needed based on times families are available 2018-19 RSCEP-R 49  How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: See above Family partnerships with CBO: See above Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes. See above. What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? We offer adult education classes on our campus. We currently offer English as a new language, HSE, Work Readiness, and will be incorporating an employment track for families. We advertise and encourage all families to take advantage of the resources available to them by way of our CBO during the registration process. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? We are in constant dialogue with our families. We leverage mailings, award ceremonies, individual meetings, and other targeted events to ensure that our families are an active partner in the scholastic success of their children. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, based on partnerships with parents, we will increase our attendance rate to 91% from 89.9%. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Progress to Graduation Year 2 & 3 Graduation Rate Attendance 2018-19 RSCEP-R 50  Part 4 – Action Plan Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parents Progress to Graduation Parents Progress to Graduation LYFE Center MHS Staff September 2018-June 2019 Once a month, all year Parents Progress to Graduation Twice a year MHS Staff Parents Progress to Graduation Twice a Year MHS Staff Provide Childcare and metrocards to parents during parent engagement events Recruit participants to attend classes (ESL, GED, Technology) to families through incentives and flexible scheduling Provide workshops around issues concerning parents (Citizenship, Immigration Policy and NYCID) Provide a workshop in using Pupilpath/Skedula and have curriculum night where teachers discuss class topics and materials with families Family Engagement Plan Parents Progress to Graduation September 2018-June 2019 MHS Staff, Parent Coordinator Attendance Incentives Students and Parents Attendance Rate, Credit Accumulation, Progress to graduation September 2018-June 2019 Students, Parents, and Teachers How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Attendance and Progress to Graduation Attendance and Progress to Graduation Attendance and Progress to Graduation Attendance and Progress to Graduation Attendance, Progress to Graduation, Learning Environment Survey Attendance, Progress to Graduation, Learning Environment Survey Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 RSCEP-R 51  Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Principal, 1 Assistant Principal, Director of School Renewal and Teacher Coaches. ● Teachers ● Guidance Counselors ● Funding for Enrichment Partnerships ● Funding for Expanded Learning Time ● College Now ● Funding for Attendance Incentives ● Advanced Placement Training ● Circular 6 SBO to allow for multiple circular 6 activities ● Multi-Session schedule to support expanded learning (0-8 periods, 1 hour periods) Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019 we will have : ● Monitored attendance weekly for all students with the target aim of achieving 90 percent ● In collaboration with CBO, monitor parent engagement activities ● Meet with Community Partners to collect parent attendance data at least twice ● Parent & Student Surveys Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Sorter and Progress to Graduation 2018-19 RSCEP-R 52  Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 53  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our attendance rate for 8th period, our Expanded Learning time Hour, will be at least 70%, a 5% increase from last year by closely monitoring attendance and instructional practices through the reallocation of resources. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. ELT is mandated for all students that have not met their graduation requirements. Because our students have such tremendous gaps in their learning and sometimes in their schooling (SIFE), we go to great lengths to inform parents of the importance of our ELT and our parents are very supportive of the additional time in school. It is part of the initial conversation during our intake process with students as they enter our school and part of our “Journey to Graduation” conversations with our families. In order to do this, we must have our programs, rosters, and teachers situated prior to the first day of school. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 54   Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? Our Expanded Learning Time Programs have been up and running since 2013. After two years of implementation, we can confidently say that the system works well for our students and our families. We found that simply offering an extended learning time option was not enough. Below is what we do as a community to provide more opportunities for students to be successful. a. Commitment to Graduation: ELT is mandated for all students that have not met their graduation requirements. Because our students have such tremendous gaps in their learning and sometimes in their schooling (SIFE), we go to great lengths to inform parents of the importance of our ELT and our parents are very supportive of the additional time in school. It is part of the intake conversation with students come to our school and part of the “Journey to Graduation” conversation with we have with our families. In order to do this, we must have our programs, rosters and teachers set for Day 1 of school. If not, it simply does not work. b. Analyze Data: We review Regents data and enrollment data to make specific recommendations for individual students. All courses with the exception of the College Now Courses are offered during the 8 th period (3:00-4:15). College Now Courses are offered 0 period (7:20 a.m.- 8:20 a.m.). i. ELT begins the first day of school and it ends on the last day of school, no exceptions. ii. ELT is offered from Monday-Thursday every week. iii. We are in year 3 of a 21 st Century Grant with our CBO-Cypress Hills Local Development Corporation. Together we collaboratively came up with a plan to support our students after school. Through the grant, we are able to have paid teaching artists and paid student workers who push into four of our classes. Programs offered during ELT include: Class Multi Reads & Yo si Puedo Cong Basketball & Health Algebra Prep English Prep Global History Prep Targeted Students Description New Entrants New Entrants Grad Requirements Not Met Grad Requirements Not Met Grad Requirements Not Met Focuses on the confidence and literacy levels of our incoming 9th grade students. perform. An all-boys class, which focuses on basketball and wellness. Our coach played College Basketball and organizes campus tournaments for our students. Traditional Regents Preparation for Students offered in Spanish and English. Traditional Regents Preparation for Students. In addition, we partnered with Urban Word and had a teaching artist come in for 12 sessions to support students in writing and reading poetry. Traditional Regents Preparation for Students offered in Spanish and English. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 55  U.S. History Prep Living Environment Prep Grad Requirements Not Met Grad Requirements Not Met College Now English Grad Requirements Met Peer Group Connection (PGC) Grad Requirements Met SAT PREP *College Now Speech Anyone Grad Requirements Met Traditional Regents Preparation for Students offered in Spanish and English. Traditional Regents Preparation for Students offered in Spanish and English. Partnered with LaGuardia Community College, our English Teacher teaches this course. We have two talents showcases a year where kids from their classes perform their poetry. Our PGC advisor teaches the leadership course for our mentor students. Mentor students then complete one outreach session a week with the dance, basketball and guitar classes. After 8 th period, we have SAT Prep for any student willing to attend. Partnered with BMCC to provide students with this oportunity c. Student Choice as Much as Possible: We pride ourselves in promoting student self-advocacy at our school, especially when it comes to all things related to Graduation. We program our students for 8 th period (ELT) courses based on what they need, but if a student wants to take Math, instead of English, 9 of 10 times we say yes. We also give students a survey at the beginning of the year asking them what they would like to take during 8 th period. Our Guidance Counselors then program our students accordingly. d. Programmatic Structures: We program our ELT into STARS and it is part of our program, complete with attendance sheets and grades—Even if the course is not credit bearing. Teachers are asked to be ELT instructors during the summer and right before the school year begins. We treat it like a regular course. e. Safety: A positive intended outcome of our ELT has been a decrease in incidents outside the perimeter of our campus. Because our ELT ends at 4:15 p.m. and students then pick up their phones and then go to the Supper Program we have for them, they do not leave our campus until 4:15 p.m. By this time, all the other schools on our campus have been released and the possibility of altercations with outsiders dramatically decreases. It’s been ideal because our parents are happy that they know exactly where their children are especially if many of them are arriving home later in the evening. Every day. f. Informing Parents: As stated previously, we discuss ELT as part of the intake process to our school. We inform parents via letters with their children’s specific graduation needs and have family meetings to further clarify and discuss if needed. Our parents are supportive of the program because it keeps their children in a safe place for a longer period of time. g. Consistency: Committing to being consistent has been key. Next year will be our third year of having ELT and it takes a while for it to become part of the culture of your school. However, our approach has been successful. We don’t end programs for any reason, unless we do not need it based on the data. Multiple conversations are had both with students and parents about the importance of graduation, and why their participation is key to their success. h. Professional Development: Through AVID, our teachers will receive professional development to support them in the “soft skills” that students need. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 56  2. 3. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? The Principal and Assistant Principal oversee the program along with the Community School Director. Because we are in year 3 of a 21 st Century Grant with our CBO-Cypress Hills Local Development Corporation, we are able to continue partnerships that have been developed over the last few years. Together we collaboratively came up with a plan to support our students after school. Through the grant, we are able to pay teaching artists and paid student workers who push into four of our classes. Partnerships include: Film Making  Global Nomads   TEALS  Dance  AVID  Partnership with Children  Peer Group Connection (Mentorship/Leadership)  Men of Action   Robotics Film Making The joint ELT is structured so that outside partners push into classrooms alongside teachers and provide services. We will monitor progress through attendance percentage, course pass rates and student surveys. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. ELT begins at the beginning of the school year and ends on the last day of school. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. ● Principal, 1 Assistant Principal, Director of School Renewal and Teacher Coaches ● Teachers ● Guidance Counselors ● Funding for Enrichment Partnerships ● Funding for Expanded Learning Time ● College Now ● Advanced Placement Training ● Circular 6 SBO to allow for multiple circular 6 activities ● AVID ● Multi-Session schedule to support expanded learning (0-8 periods, 1 hour periods) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 57  Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X X Tax Levy Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X P/F Set-aside C4E SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks ● Teacher Performance on Evaluation supported by observations and targeted interventions (June of 2017) ● Six Teacher Leader Meetings throughout the year to monitor progress, data and instructional practices ● Monthly Professional Development Committee Meetings to ensure professional development is aligned to student and teacher need ● Principal and Assistant Principal monitor teacher level observation data to adjust professional development and differentiated support for individual teachers Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress to Graduation and Credit Accumulation Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 58  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the school, in partnership with its CBO, will have supported 100% of families through a minimum of 6 targeted contacts. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Progress to Graduation n/a n/a Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Cypress Hills Local Development Co. Target Population Scope of Service All Students and Parents All community related events. Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community 2. 3. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 59  4. School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. In collaboration with our CBO, Cypress Hills Local Development Corporation, the first plan is to coordinate our school calendar and the CBO calendar to ensure that our supports are aligned and resources are allocated effectively. The Community School Director will have access to school based personnel and school level data and reports to best assess the needs of our school through surveys, interviews and meetings with various constituents. Through the collective plan, we will execute activities that would best align to identified needs. The Community School Director must have a keen awareness of when students are enrolling into our school. It is at this point, through the initial intake process, that students are initially assessed through conversations with families and guidance counselors to determine if any external supports are necessary, including mental health services and expanded learning time. To continue to engage parents throughout the school year, we will review the learning environment survey and plan events around the needs that parents have articulated. Based on the various data sources available to our community, we will then determine a thematic calendar to address the needs of parents, where workshops will be offered to parents around understanding Graduation Requirements, Parenting, Immigration, Helping students study and other relevant workshops. Our school is committed to inviting the Community School Director to our weekly cabinet meetings to support the communication and anticipated data analysis and case management at our school. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students The Director of High School Programs from Cypress Hills Local Development Corporation, the Community School Director and the Principal will oversee the Community School Program. Our School-Based Clinic and Expanded learning time partners will be involved as well. Please see section 3B for information on CBO involvement. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. ● Principal, 1 Assistant Principal, Director of School Renewal and Teacher Coaches ● Director of High School Programs, CBO ● Community School Director, CBO ● Guidance Counselors ● Funding for Enrichment Partnerships ● Funding for Expanded Learning Time ● College Now 2018-19 RSCEP-R 60  ● Advanced Placement Training ● Circular 6 SBO to allow for multiple circular 6 activities ● Multi-Session schedule to support expanded learning (0-8 periods, 1 hour periods Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. ● Summer Planning ● Implementation for students and families begins in September 2016 to July 2017 ● Monthly workshops starting in September to support families through a variety of targeted workshop targets. Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 61  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Regents, NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, Scholarship Report, Brigance Assessments, Middle School Exams Regents, NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, Scholarship Report, Brigance Assessments, Middle School Exams Regents, NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, Scholarship Report, Brigance Assessments, Middle School Exams Regents, NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, Scholarship Report, Brigance Assessments, Middle School Exams Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Zero Period ESL College Now, 8 th Period Regents Preparation, Castle Learning, Formative Assessment, Culturally Relevant Reading, and Translanguaging Zero Period ESL College Now, 8 th Period Regents Preparation, Castle Learning, Formative Assessment, Culturally Relevant Reading, and Translanguaging Zero Period ESL College Now, 8 th Period Regents Preparation, Castle Learning, Formative Assessment, Culturally Relevant Reading, and Translanguaging Zero Period ESL College Now, 8 th Period Regents Preparation, Castle Learning, Formative Assessment, Culturally Relevant Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Group Instruction, One to one, Tutoring and computer aided instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, before and after school Small Group Instruction, One to one, Tutoring and computer aided instruction During the school day, before and after school Small Group Instruction, One to one, Tutoring and computer aided instruction During the school day, before and after school Small Group Instruction, One to one, Tutoring and computer aided instruction During the school day, before and after school 2018-19 RSCEP-R 62 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Regents, NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, Scholarship Report, Brigance Assessments, Middle School Exams, Core 5 Reading, and Translanguaging Pull out, Push In, individualized counseling sessions, monthly advisory/town halls, classroom workshops, referrals to North Shore LIJ on site clinic, RAPP, SPARK & LGBT support Small Group Instruction, One to one, Tutoring and computer aided instruction During the school day, before and after school 2018-19 RSCEP-R 63  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We have two students as of July 27, 2018 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide families with housing workshops, ensure that students are given school supplies and uniform shirts. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). The majority of our students are doubled up but are not in temporary housing. As of today, we have 5 students in 2018-19 RSCEP-R 64  2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. Provide mental health counseling and additional school supplies and relevant materials. temporary housing. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 RSCEP-R 65  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We actively recruit teachers based on retention of staff. In partnership with multiple organizations that we work with and the DOE, we solicit resumes and candidates based on qualifications, specifically bilingual licensed teachers who are the best fit for our population. In addition to our recruitment practices, once teachers are on board, they will receive ongoing mentoring and coaching support specifically geared towards enhancing our culturally relevant curricular practices. Professional development is always based on teacher need and student need. Ongoing professional development occurs outside of the building and in house that is aligned to the mission and vision of the school. Assignments of teachers are based on student need and teacher license area. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Ongoing Professional Development by Department of Ells, Administrators, Metamorphosis and Superintendent’s Office ● ASCD Professional Development Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 RSCEP-R 66  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Teachers receive professional development around the use of assessment ● Our school has a comprehensive assessment plan ● Teachers receive feedback on classroom level assessments ● Teachers and administrators analyze state assessments to understand strengths and instructional gaps that students may have to help target instruction ● Teachers also review student assessments and student work products during team meetings to improve instruction 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 67  Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 296,704.00 56729 0 24,424.00 0 1,725,105.00 X X X 10-43 10-43 10-43 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 68   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 69  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Multicultural High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Multicultural High School will support parents and families of Title I students by:  Providing materials and training opportunities to help parents work with their children to improve graduation outcomes and language acquisition.  Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children;  Aiding parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Support Parents in understanding key instructional strategies and integrating UnidosUS' Padres Comprometidos.  2018-19 RSCEP-R 70   Providing parents with volunteer opportunities to help them build on their professional skills. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents' children who attend the school. The Parent Coordinator (or dedicated staff person) will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office; ● In addition to the parent coordinator, we have a community coordinator to support with conducting parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA /State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under ESSA; ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions and feedback; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 71  ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; andconduct SLT in Spanish if necessary ● Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; Supporting or hosting Family Day events;   Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Invite parents to act as full partners in making school decisions that affect children and families.  School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Multicultural High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by:  Using academic learning time efficiently;  Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences;   Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 72   Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the EveryStudent Succeeds Act (ESSA);  Providing students with tutoring and class advancing opportunities such as making up work to earn a higher grade. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 73  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; ● target specific parent groups for specialized meetings I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 74  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 75 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 RSCEP-R 76  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Students literacy levels in English and Spanish will be determined by way of the NYSITELL NYSESLAT CORE 5/Strategies Diagnostic Rewards Gates-MCGinitie Spanish Lab-R Begin description here: All students will be serviced through our TITLE III model as 269 of our students are considered ELLS, and 30 are considered Former ELLs. We are integrating a Response to Intervention Model to support students based on their individual needs. Direct Instruction will be provided in the programs discussed below to offer rigorous instruction to ELLs. Since all programs are taught in both English and Spanish with Spanish support, our students make more progress towards acquiring the English language and meeting graduation requirements. · following assessments:NYSITELLNYSESLATCORE 5/Strategies DiagnosticRewardsGates-MCGinitieSpanish Lab-R · · · · · · Students literacy levels in English and Spanish will be determined by way of the following assessments: · · · · · · NYSITELL NYSESLAT CORE 5/Strategies Diagnostic Rewards Gates-MCGinitie Spanish Lab-R · double block of English for 30 mins at a time. &nbsp;Teachers will engage in small group instruction. &nbsp; Students will engage in the Tier 2 Interventions at minimum twice a week during the double block of English for 30 mins at a time. Teachers will engage in small group instruction. · 15 minutes every day during their ELA/ESL courses.Literature CirclesCase Conferencing Journaling · · NYSITELL NYSESLAT CORE 5/Strategies Diagnostic Rewards Gates-MCGinitie Spanish Lab-R Students will engage in the Tier 2 Interventions at minimum twice a week during the All students will engage in Independent Reading by way of Drop Everything in Read for Literature Circles Case Conferencing 2018-19 RSCEP-R 77  Grade Teams will discuss student progress and implications for lesson planning bi-ESL Teachers will provide Tier 2 interventions (by way of small groups and targeted ELA/ESL Teachers will support students with developing literacy goals based on their Journaling ESL Teachers will meet weekly on Tuesdays during 3rd period &nbsp;to discuss student Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information · · progress. &nbsp;&nbsp;Teachers will inform parents of student progress once a month. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;At this time teachers will synthesize trends, growth, and areas in need of support for students. All students will engage in Independent Reading by way of Drop Everything in Read for 15 minutes every day during their ELA/ESL courses. · Literature Circles · Case Conferencing · Journaling Literature Circles Case Conferencing Journaling ESL Teachers will meet weekly on Tuesdays during 3rd period to discuss student progress. Teachers will inform parents of student progress once a month. At this time teachers will synthesize trends, growth, and areas in need of support for students. · progress to support metacognition. ELA/ESL Teachers will support students with developing literacy goals based on their progress to support metacognition. · weekly. Grade Teams will discuss student progress and implications for lesson planning bi-weekly. · instruction) for students that need additional support as a result of progress monitoring on literacy programs ESL Teachers will provide Tier 2 interventions (by way of small groups and targeted instruction) for students that need additional support as a result of progress monitoring on literacy programs · Students will be enrolled in additional literacy supports during Expanded Learning Time based on their needsYo Si Puedo Eslera&nbsp;ProgramIntermediate Reading Advanced Literacy · · · · Students will be enrolled in additional literacy supports during Expanded Learning Time based on their needs · · · · Yo Si Puedo Eslera Program Intermediate Reading Advanced Literacy · supported with tier 3 Interventions. Students who are not progressing due to performance (not attendance or behavior) will be supported with tier 3 Interventions. · intervention services are appropriate. &nbsp; Students who are not progressing due to performance (not attendance or behavior) will be Yo Si Puedo Eslera&nbsp;Program Intermediate Reading Advanced Literacy Yo Si Puedo Eslera&nbsp;Program Intermediate Reading Advanced Literacy Students will be continuously monitored to determine whether or not additional 2018-19 RSCEP-R 78  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Students will be continuously monitored to determine whether or not additional intervention services are appropriate. ELT (Extended Learning Time) Program: Our ELT program offers an opportunity for students to benefit from various classes that range from Regents Prep to the Arts. This gives students an extended schedule and a chance to be exposed to English in the context of both curricular and extracurricular activities. Students will be provided with academic and social support in order to be prepared for college through AVID classes. Furthermore, students receive intervention and learn test-taking strategies in different content areas such as Social Studies, Math, Science, and SAT Prep classes in order to work towards completing graduation requirements. All classes are taught in both English and Spanish. The ELT program is from 3:00-4:15 PM (75 min), Mondays through Thursdays, for a total of 138 sessions per class for the entire school year. Other funding sources will be utilized to complement the cost of the program. Our EDAT indicates the following to be true about our school: -We have 64 SIFE students at our school -Our average attendance rate was 91% last year -90% of our students are ELLs -4% of our our students are "at-risk level 5 or greater". Our ELT program begins on September 5th, 2018 and ends on June 17, 2019. ELT takes place everyday except for Fridays. The language of instruction is English and Spanish. Home language supports in all classrooms include dictionaries, glossaries, and translated materials for students who need the scaffolds. In addition, teachers offer direct instruction along with flexible grouping based on language modality and proficiency levels to support students. - Algebra Offered to Grades 11th -12th graders who have not passed the Algebra Regents Exam - - Principles of Leadership - Offered to Grades 11-12 - Basketball with Mr. Screen (Certified in Physical Education) - Offered to Grades 9-12 - - Literacy Program (REWARDS Program) - Enrichment Classes - Offered to Grades 9-12 - CORE 5 - US History - Global History - Offered to Grades 10-11 -ELA Regents Prep -Earth Science Prep -Living Environment Prep -Materials that will be used in the ELT/Saturday program are as follows: - Copy Paper and Colored Copy Paper will be used for reproduction of materials such as worksheets and informational text - AVID curriculum - Educational Software: Core 5 & Rewards will be used for increasing students' Lexile levels in English - Educational Software: Castle Learning -Curricular Materials: Fountas and Pinnell in Spanish ENIL-American Reading Company Estructura para la Evaluacion del nivel independiente de lectura-reading program that builds reading competency in Spanish Supplementary Saturday School will be offered from 9:00AM to 1:00PM (4 hours). The following is the breakdown of classes that will be offered: (Other funding sources will be used to complement the cost of the program) Dates are December 1st, 8th, 15th January 5th, 12th, 19th April 27th, May 4th, 11th, 18th and June 1st and 8th 2018-19 RSCEP-R 79  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information - Algebra - Earth Science (30 students per class, 2 classes) - English Certified in ENL:) (4 classes, 30 students each) - US History (Certified in Social Studies, with a Bilingual Extension) - Offered to Grades 11-12 - seats open for enrollment (4 classes, 30 students each) -Global History Materials that will be used in Supplemental Saturday School are as follows: - Copy Paper and Colored Copy Paper will be used for reproduction of materials such as worksheets and informational text - Educational Software: Core 5 & Rewards will be used for increasing students' Lexile levels in English - Educational Software: Castle Learning -Educational Program: Theatre Moves, a supplemental program in which teaching artists teach in collaboration with ENL/ELA teachers to support students with their oral proficiency in English. We also have a program called Literacy through Drama for grades 11th and 12th. This program works with our ENL/ELA students to develop language skills through age appropriate topics. It also provides a counselor who meets with students individually each week to check in on them about their goals. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: This year, our school is focusing on the alignment of curriculum with the Common Core State Standards and Engage NY ELL Language Progressions along with NYS assessments . As such, we have opened the opportunity for our teachers to attend workshops offered by the following providers: 1. Department of English Language Learners and Student Support - DELLSS offers regular professional development workshops that are geared towards improving students' performance in productive as well as receptive performance indicators such as reading, listening, writing, and speaking. Some examples of workshops are: Workshops provided by the DELLSS are open to all teachers in the school who are interested in attending, but specifically, Mr Prince, Ms. Verrilli, and Ms. Kagan will be attending. 2. CUNY New York State Initiative for Emergent Bilinguals (CUNY NYSIEB) - Our school has been partners with CUNY NYSIEB for two years now, and we have learned two specific strategies for ELLs that we have implemented school-wide. These are translanguaging and creating a multicultural ecology in the school. With our continued partnership, our teachers will be better trained at implementing these strategies in their classrooms. They will also learn how to revise existing curriculum to incorporate trasnlanguaging strategies. They workshops they offer are as follows: In addition to these two seminars, CUNY NYSIEB will be sending staff to our school to provide professional development to our teachers during Chancellor's Conference days. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 80  Part C: Professional Development Workshops provided by CUNY NYSIEB are open to teachers in the Emergent Bilingual Leadership Team (EBLT) which is comprised of all grade team and department team leaders. 3. The Brooklyn North Field Support Center supports our dual language program and has integrated our school into an ELL pilot to support best practices across high schools in North Brooklyn. 4. Teachers will receive ongoing support from Teacher Leaders (PCT, Model Teacher), 5. Metamorphosis Math consulting to support with the development of language within the classrooms as well as support our Dual Language Program in our content areas classrooms. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: The Bilingual Parent Coordinator and the Bilingual Guidance Counselor work together to organize the activities outlined below for parent engagement. Volunteer student workers who are proficient in both English and Spanish assist them in translating letters to be mailed out, as well as in making phone calls. Furthermore, our school messenger system is set up in both English and Spanish to ensure that all parents of ELLs are well-informed of the activities listed below. Records of agendas and attendance sheets are kept in a binder in the Principal's office. 1. PTA - Parents are invited once a month to attend Parent Teacher Association Meetings, where both the Bilingual Parent Coordinator and Bilingual Certified Guidance Counselor provide workshops. Meetings take place from 6:30 pm to 7:30 pm on the dates specified below. Parents are notified of PTA meetings by mail and messenger system. The following topics will be covered: -August 30- Bienvenidos! -September 13 -Adjusting to High School - October 11 - Student Progress - November 8- Study Skills - December 6 - Preparing ELLs for State Exams - January 10- How does the Peer Group Connection benefit your child? - February 7- Where does my child stand? - March 7 - Study Skills and Translanguaging Strategies for ELLs - April 11 - Supporting High School Students - May 9- Plan B: Intervention and Next Steps for ELL Students not Passing State Exams - June 6 - Spring Banquet 2. ENL night English as New Language-Parents are invited to learn about curriculum and how they can support their children's learning. Materials that will be used for these sessions are as follows: -Copy Paper - Chart Paper - Pens - Markers 2018-19 RSCEP-R 81  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities - Award Certificates - Folders 2. Family Fun Day - Twice a year, we invite parents to participate in a school-wide field day. This is to develop camaraderie among staff members, parents and students in the school. Parents will be notified by mail and school messenger. Padres Comprometidos will meet once a week to discuss parenting methods for adolescence. This workshop will be conducted by our parent coordinator and social worker. It will be conducted in Spanish Parents will be notified by phone calls and letters. This program will be for the entire school year. At MHS we have hired a Bilingual social worker to support students with trauma. He will meet with groups of students before, during and after school. He will also conduct workshops in class on as need bases. Elevate workshops for parents; this program is designed to support parents with study habits and skills necessary needed to in order to help their child to be successful in high school. Know your Rights Forum Teacher led workshops; topics will vary through out he the school year Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 82  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 3. 4. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 RSCEP-R 83  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 19 School Name Multicultural High School Borough Brooklyn School Number 583 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Alexandra Hernandez Coach Susan Picker ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Bianny Ovalles Teacher/Subject Area Maria Verrilli/Reading Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider n/a Superintendent Superintendent Ross Assistant Principal Peter Ng-A-Fook Coach School Counselor Crystal Franco Parent type here Parent Coordinator Rogers Pichardo Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 6 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 270 2018-19 RSCEP-R 84 Total number of ELLs 255 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 94.44%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 60 30 0 0 0 0 90 10 30 30 60 11 60 12 60 60 60 Tot # 210 0 0 60 0 0 270 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our goal is work together and provide students with enough resources and support so they will develop a love for reading. The increase reading awareness across the content area will make us aware and focused in the ways we approach literacy across our classrooms. We will build comprehension, reading stamina, and self esteem through literacy. We are integrating a Response to Intervention Model to support students based on their individual needs. Last year many of us were pleased with the progress our students made with regard to writing. Resoundingly we heard that young people struggled with analysis when reading and understanding text. This year it is our intention is to support students by addressing specific reading skills using an RTI model. Furthermore, we will look at our literacy instruction school wide to determine how we can meet the needs of our students. Students literacy levels in English and Spanish will be determined by way of the following assessments: NYSITELL NYSESLAT 2018-19 RSCEP-R 85  CORE 5/Strategies Diagnostic Rewards Gates-MCGinitie Spanish Lab-R ThinkMath ENIL RILA Students will engage in the Tier 2 Interventions at minimum twice a week during the double block of English for 30 mins at a time. Teachers will engage in small group instruction. All students will engage in Independent Reading by way of Drop Everything in Read for 15 minutes every day during their ELA/ENL courses. Literature Circles Case Conferencing Journaling Etc Intervention Teachers will meet weekly on Wednesday during 3rd period to discuss student progress. Teachers will enter their interventions in a Google drive. Teachers will inform parents of student progress once a month. At this time teachers will synthesize trends, growth, and areas in need of support for students. ELA/ENL Teachers will support students with developing literacy goals based on their progress to support metacognition. Grade Teams will discuss student progress and implications for lesson planning bi-weekly. ENL Teachers will provide Tier 2 interventions (by way of small groups and targeted instruction) for students that need additional support as a result of progress monitoring on literacy programs Students will be enrolled in additional literacy supports during Expanded Learning Time based on their needs Yo Si Puedo Intermediate Reading Advanced Literacy Students who are not progressing due to performance (not attendance or behavior) will be supported with tier 3 Interventions. Students will be continuously monitored to determine whether or not additional intervention services are appropriate. Interventions Duration Structure Intended Outcomes Target Students Curriculum Teacher Rewards 3-5 times a week Small Group To move students two levels in reading who are at the 3rd grade reading level in English 2018-19 RSCEP-R 86  Tier 2: 11th-12th who score Transitioning or above on NYSESLAT. REWARDS PROGRAM textbook and teacher manual. Kagan & Olivo RIGOR 2x a week Large Group Development of explicit student behaviors. Students will make demonstrable growth in vocabulary development, comprehension, and content knowledge. Tier 2: 9th grade Bilingual Content driven literacy instruction intended for students below 3rd grade level Ovalles & Fiallo Wilson 3-5 times a week Small Group/One-One Tier 3 program for students with word-level deficits who are not making progress with Tier 2. Tier 3: Intensive instruction due to a language based learning disability/dyslexia. Program is designed for birth-adulthood. Structured literacy program to teach students decoding and encoding skills. Verrilli Core5/Strategies 3-5 times a week Large Group/Small group Learn key comprehension strategies for listening and reading Develop phonological awareness and phonics skills that are integrated with oral language development Leverage picture-based activities to build concrete and abstract academic vocabulary Tier 2: For ELL students with beginner-level language. Students with proficient language skills but weak reading skills. CORE 5 computer based reading program Ovalles & Kagan D.E.A.R. 5x a week Large Group/Small To increase students love to read by Dropping Everything and Read for 15-20 minutes per day. Build stamina and persistence. Tier 1: All students Literature books from Core program. In addition, students will select books of their choice. All Teachers 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? See Above 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Ultimately, the same measures the city and state use to determine the success of the school determines the success of the ELL program. This is due to the fact that our student population is made up of 90% ELLs. The results (passing rate and progress) of state assessments (NYSESLAT, Regents Exams, progress in Performance Based Assessments in Measures of Student Learning or MOSL) determine the success of the school's program for the ELLs. The school also looks at credit accumulation and whether a student is on track to graduate with their cohort. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 87  Weekly Literacy Intervention Team Meetings, monthly progress monitoring with student logs. Interventions will be conducted by our team of teachers which are comprised of ENL, English, Reading and Special Ed teacher. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] NOT APPLICABLE TO OUR SCHOOL. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT, ELA, MATH Regents, AP Scores 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Co-Teaching Models, Multi Reads Team, and Cabinet Inquiry Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. NOT APPLICABLE TO OUR SCHOOL b. TBE program. If applicable. Students at Multicultural High School travel together from class to class. These blocks are determined by the following factors: (1) credit accumulation, (2) number of Regents Exams passed, and (3) NYSESLAT proficiency level. The blocks are also determined by students' grade levels, although a class may have students in different grade levels depending on the first three factors mentioned above. The school uses a trimester model to give students the maximum opportunity to obtain credits. Instructional time in school also runs from 7:30AM to 4:09PM, starting from Zero Period to Period 8. Students are programmed for 8 periods, including intervention and enrichment classes which include SAT Prep, Music, Basketball, Art, Math, Living Environment, Regents Prep and Reading Interventions. The school also follows a Trimester Model to allow for multiple opportunities for students to accumulate credit and make up for subjects failed. Students are given dictionaries, glossaries, translanguage and targeted vocabulary to support their language acquisition. c. DL program. If applicable. Our DL program will be one week English and one week Spanish. Students will receive supports in both English and Spanish. Students will receive a pin upon entering the program. We willl celebrate their work by hosting family fair four times a year. We have purchased books for students to read in both English and Spanish. We have also colored coded our weeks.; Blue for Spanish and Pink for English. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Multicultural High School has classes in 58-minute periods. All ELLs are programmed to take 2 periods of ENL everyday (totaling 580 minutes per week), and students who are receiving continued ELL services because they scored Proficient or Commanding in the NYSESLAT are programmed to take 1 period of English with an ESL Certified teacher (totaling 290 minutes 2018-19 RSCEP-R 88  per week). All ELLs also receive support in the form of Native Language Arts (NLA) classes, and former ELLs are programmed into Advanced Placement classes in Spanish Language and Spanish Literature. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Entering and Emerging students are programmed in content area classes with explicit instruction in Spanish. However, content area teachers may introduce vocabulary in both Spanish and English to support students’ language acquisition in English. Furthermore, content area teachers introduce classroom routines and procedures in Spanish and then translate in English to provide students with an opportunity to develop their Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS). The ratio followed by content area teachers is instruction in 25% English and 75% in Spanish. Transitioning students receive instruction in 50% English and 50% Spanish. Expanding students receive instruction in 75% English and 25% Spanish. Transitioning students receive content area instruction in both English and Spanish in several forms. A content area teacher may introduce a lesson in English but have the textbook or reading in Spanish. Another way of differentiating instruction would be to give instructions in Spanish but to provide content area vocabulary in English for the student to have support in accomplishing a task in English. This supports development of the students Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP). Expanding students receive content area instruction in English but still receive support in the native language in the form of text translations, dictionaries, and secondary sources in order for the material to be made comprehensible. As part of CUNY NYSIEB, the school also has an ongoing creation of a multilingual ecology within the campus. Developing a print-rich environment and making materials available in both English and Spanish are the main components of this ecology. Students are provided with Spanish-English dictionaries in all classrooms, and teachers are provided with cognate dictionaries to support lesson planning and making purposeful choices in what key vocabulary to focus on. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All content area teachers are required to give baseline assessments available in both English and Spanish (with the exception of assessments in English or ENL classes). Formative assessments are also consistently given daily in all subjects, mostly in the form of exit slips. In these informal assessments, students are allowed to express themselves in English or Spanish. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiated Instruction a. SIFE – Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE Students) are programmed in the same block. The 9th and 10th Grade SIFE students are combined in one block, and the 11th and 12th SIFE students are another block. Using common planning time, teachers review the curriculum across departments to ensure that both linguistic and academic goals are supported in different content areas, and are part of each lesson. Following the content based language learning model, ESL teachers collaborate with content area teachers to reinforce topics in the language classroom. Assessment alignment to state exams, as well as data review, are also discussed during common planning time. Instruction is delivered using several intensive literacy strategies to bridge gaps in education. Study skills such as how to take notes effectively, how to skim or scan a reading, and how to use the dictionary are all taught and become routine exercises across curriculums. In order to have better comprehension of content area texts, teachers use different versions (teacher-modified versions or versions of text at different reading levels) of the same reading, whenever possible and available, to differentiate input. Teachers also use pre-reading activities such as activating prior knowledge with the use of KWL Charts and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 89  brainstorm maps. During reading, teachers demonstrate to the SIFE students how to learn the meaning of vocabulary through context. Sheltered instruction strategies are implemented where students follow the collaborative learning model to do jigsaws, turn-and-talk dialogues, and group reporting. SIFE students are also programmed to take Saturday Academy classes to increase language exposure and recover any credits they may be missing. They are also programmed into an 8th period class, which is an intervention class for credits they are missing or for Regents Prep. b. Newcomers (Less than 3 years) Students who are completely new to the country initially receive instruction with a focus on the following skills: (1) phonemic awareness, (2) decoding text, and (3) lexile sophistication. The curriculum is developed with tasks that focus on Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS) initially, and then transition into developing Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency with the use of the following scaffolding techniques: • Vocabulary development in activities like What Did You See? and Inquiry and Elimination which not only allows students to practice using new words but also gives them a structured venue to master question and answer dialogues. • Print-Rich environments in all classrooms (word walls, visuals and concept maps), regardless of the content area, to make key vocabulary and concepts accessible. • Invitation, Response, Feedback (IRF) where the teacher first models the expected linguistic output, and then asks leading questions to encourage a response. After the student responds, the teacher gives immediate feedback in the form of repetition with correction to demonstrate the desired response. • Exploratory talk in the classroom where students engage in think-alouds, think-pair-shares, and information gap activities in order to discover and negotiate meaning in a text. • Read-Alouds and Shared Reading Models where teachers first model fluency and then provide opportunities for ELLs to interact with the text. In addition to these strategies, students who are Entering and Emerging in our school have access to Rosetta Stone in school, as well as outside school, to expedite English language acquisition. To improve skills in reading comprehension, students make use of Achieve 3000 and are assigned informational text in their lexile levels. Following the reading activities are comprehension questions that are patterned after the questions of the English Regents. c. Developing ELLs 4-6 years As evidenced by data over the years, students in Multicultural High School fail to test out primarily because of their reading and writing skills, not listening and speaking. For this reason, the focus of the school for ELLs with 4-6 years of service is reading comprehension and writing skills. To address needs in writing, teachers begin with graphic organizers to brainstorm and build prior knowledge on topics to be discussed in the writing output. Key vocabulary is introduced and reiterated throughout unit lessons. The teacher models how to write the text, then proceeds with joint construction with the class or with a small group. Students then engage in independent writing, peer editing, revision, and publishing to complete the writing process. In every step, teachers have checkpoints/checklists to ensure that expected outcomes are clear. Rubrics are also used to guide student writing. To address needs in reading comprehension, teachers use guided reading where text is introduced, read, discussed and extended into independent activities allowing students to summarize, respond to and reconstruct the text. In order to facilitate meaningful discussions about the text, teachers explicitly teach how to create inferences and predictions based on evidence from the reading. Independent Reading is also valuable for students in this group. The key to this strategy is for the text to be student-selected instead of teacher selected. At least once a week, English teachers ask students to Drop Everything and Read (DEAR) a text chosen by the student from the classroom library. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 90  Students in this group also have access to Rosetta Stone and Achieve 3000. d. Long-term ELLs (6 years up) Multicultural High School does not have a population of Long-term ELLs. However, if in the coming years we should have students that fall in this category, these students will be grouped with other students in the same grade and proficiency level, and thus will be exposed to the same strategies mentioned above for ELLs that have less number of years of service. These students receive differentiated instruction not only in varied versions of the input (a teacher-modified text with translations in the margins, or material represented in graphic organizers, story maps and timelines, for example) but also in expected output (alternative assignments tailored after their mixed abilities, step-by-step instructions for any task, and scaffolded assignments with hints in the margins or checkpoints after every step). Literacy and study skills are reinforced in the classroom, for example, predicting, sharing existing knowledge, using KWL charts, modeled reading, skimming/scanning through text, rereading for details and answering cloze exercises. Students in this group also have access to Rosetta Stone and Achieve 3000.Instructional Strategies for ELL-SWDs - Students with Disabilities are included in the mainstream classroom. Mainstream classroom teachers differentiate their lessons using the Universal Design for Learning model to scaffold for these students. The support of the Special Education teacher is requested and the teacher pushes-in to provide strategies based on students' needs. Students in this group also have access to Rosetta Stone and Achieve 3000. e. Former ELLs 100% of our students who are former ELLs are on track to graduation and have been programmed on the Advanced Placement (AP) track. These students are taking classes in AP English with a certified ESL teacher. Along with this are courses in AP Human Geography, AP Spanish Language, AP Spanish Literature, and AP Environmental Science. All Advanced Placement classes are taught by teachers who have bilingual certification or who are working towards becoming bilingually certified. Teachers who instruct these students make use of the same strategies used for students who are still ELLs and utilize the same materials (bilingual dictionaries, side-by-side text translations, etc.) to ensure that these students still have the support available to them if needed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs with disabilities may be pulled out by the Special Education teacher to receive services anytime during the school day, provided that the pullout session will support the content area materials being discussed in the class the student with disability is missing. The Special Education teacher modifies the lesson to bring it to the student's level. Furthermore, a paraprofessional is assigned to our ELL-SWDs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students who are ELL-SWDs are programmed with regular students, only with the additional support in the form of the Special Education teacher and paraprofessional who push in or team-teach with the content area teacher. All strategies that apply to ELLs in our school are also utilized for students with disabilities. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Struggling students in content area subjects are programmed into 8th period classes and Supplementary Saturday Academy programs. In these programs, teachers instruct in both English and Spanish and provide additional materials to reinforce 2018-19 RSCEP-R 91  content covered in regular school hours. In addition, the school has dedicated one period a week to tutoring and mentoring students who are in need of intervention. This is one of the teachers' assigned professional periods. These services are provided by teachers who are certified in ESL, Special Edcuation, Bilingual Education, or Reading/Literacy. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? a. Computer-Aided Instruction - Currently, the listening and speaking modalities are not being assessed formally as regularly as the reading and writing modalities. This coming school year, we hope to purchase one tablet for each student so that they can have access to the Internet and a recording device to complete regular research projects and create oral presentations. b. Peer Group Connection - Last year we piloted a peer advisory program where select peer leaders from the senior and junior classes conducted weekly outreach with the freshmen. We are continuing this program next year but with a better setup in that peer groups will be smaller because there will be more peer leaders. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The We Can We Will initiative that began as an advisory program for students who are almost on track to graduation will be replaced by the weekly tutoring/mentoring periods that will be included in the school's regular schedule. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Students are programmed into 8th period classes based on needs and interest. If a student has a request, their programs are changed based on availability and with the priority of helping the student work towards being on track to graduation. In addition, teachers may propose programs to the administration, and pending approval, advertise these programs school-wide. The teachers first reach out to the students in their classes to see if there is an interest in participating in such programs. Then, the program is recommended by either other subject teachers or the guidance counselor, depending on the student’s performance in classes. Finally, flyers are distributed and posters are put up to ensure that everyone in school is aware of the programs they can avail of. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. a. SmartBoard b. Internet Access c. Spanish-English Dictionaries d. Rewards e. Rosetta Stone f. Laptop Carts for each grade and the Computer Room at 465 g. Audio-Visual Material to support textbook content (CDs, DVDs, etc.) h. RIGOR books i. Multi-language texts j. Leveled text with high interest topics, available in Spanish and English k. Tablets L. Core 5 J. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students are programmed to take one class in Native Language Arts every trimester. If a student tests out, they take Spanish as an advanced foreign language class, possibly to take the AP Spanish exam. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The programs and services offered to ELLs are planned in accordance with the needs of high school students who are preparing to go to college. Our resources and materials are college-preparatory level materials. Furthermore, in offering 8th 2018-19 RSCEP-R 92  period programs that are high interest (such as drama, sports and music), students are given opportunities to develop literacy in a creative manner. SIFE students also receive instruction in subjects they are failing or where they need to pass Regents Exams during 8th period. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? a. SmartBoard b. Internet Access c. Spanish-English Dictionaries d. Crome books e. Rosetta Stone f. Laptop Carts for each grade and the Computer Room at 465 g. Audio-Visual Material to support textbook content (CDs, DVDs, etc.) h. RIGOR books i. Multi-language texts j. Leveled text with high interest topics, available in Spanish and English k. Tablets 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students who are new arrivals come in during the summer to receive orientation into the new school. This orientation is conducted by the Parent Coordinator, in partnership with the teaching staff and administrators of the school. Throughout the year, newcomers are included in weekly outreach sessions with select peer leaders from the senior and junior classes. These peer groups serve as a support system that aids the newcomer in transitioning to a new country and school. In the peer group outreach sessions, students discuss issues involving academics, goal-setting, bullying and cyberbullying, safety and security. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language Electives are offered in advanced Spanish to prepare students for the AP Spanish test. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NOT APPLICABLE TO OUR SCHOOL. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The four principles that inform our professional development this year are as follows: (1) teaching is intentional, (2) assignments matter, (3) dynamic bilingualism, and (4) expectations connected to student achievement. These principles are based on the following premises: a. When teaching is not intentional, there are no discussions, no rubric. Routines are not in order and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 93  students lack support systems. Teachers can be better supported by professional development on how learning intentions can be more deliberate and target students' needs. b. Assignments should be rigorous, collected, challenging, and connected to evaluations mandated by the state. c. Translanguaging strategies makes purposeful use of students' abilities in both languages. These strategies need to be taught intentionally and shared with students. d. Expectations from students need to be raised so that students will meet it. The school provides Staff Development during Common Planning Time. Furthermore, the school uses Chancellor's conference days and faculty conference days, as well as hours during Regents Exam Week, to provide workshops for the teachers. Topics discussed in these sessions include: a. Translanguaging Strategies to address the needs and deficiencies of our students b. Looking at Student Work and assessment results. c. Working with a SIFE Population (SIFE Bridges Program) d. Working with the Danielson Framework. e. Supporting ELLs and Students with Disabilities in meeting the Common Core Learning Standards. f. Using the Universal Design for Learning to support ELLs and SWDs in the content area classroom. g. Using the Universal Design for Learning to support ELLs and SWDs in the language classroom. h. How to support ELLs and SWDs in meeting Citiwide Instructional Expectations. i. Using classroom protocols to scaffold lessons for ELLs. j. Using Item Analysis to Inform Instruction for ELLs. These topics are discussed within our school's cycle of inquiry, in which staff looks at student work to identify opportunities for learning, learns a strategy to address students' weaknesses, tries the strategy in the classroom, then assesses and evaluates the effectiveness of the strategy to address student needs. Furthermore, the school opted out in the city's implementation of the English Language Arts Core Curriculum, Collections. Since this is the first year the school will be implementing curriculum, teachers of the Literacy Department will have the opportunity to attend professional development sessions on the use of this curriculum. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Teachers and stakeholders in the Peer Group Connection program attend a total of 10 professional development sessions (10 days) with the provider of the program's curriculum, Center for Supportive Schools. The in-service session in September as well as all Chancellor's Conference Days are devoted to staff development workshops that introduce strategies in helping ELLs achieve college-readiness. These sessions exceed the 7.5 hours mandated by Jose P. In addition, teachers are allowed to seek out and attend professional development on ELLs outside school during school days. The payroll secretary of the school makes copies of the workshop agenda and materials and keeps a file for each staff member's professional development. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 94  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We schedule meetings with parents three times a year that are based on the individual student's needs. In addition to discussing the students' language progress we discuss the students progress towards graduation. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The parents of Multicultural High School students are involved in various ways: a. Coming to the parent-teacher conferences. This year, those meetings will be held on the following dates: November 19 th and 20 th , and March 10 th and 11 th . b. Parents come for one-on-one meetings (scheduled or walk-in) with the Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Dean, teachers and administrators to discuss the following issues: i. Credit Accumulation ii. Failure in Class iii. Long-Term Absences iv. Having more than 5 absences in a short span of time. v. Behavior Issues vi. Road to Graduation vii. College Readiness c. Helping our staff to organize events for students. d. Teachers and student appreciation day. e. Parent Teacher Association Meetings and School Leadership Team Meetings. This year, the meetings are scheduled for the following dates: September 30 th , October 28 th , November 18 th , December 16 th , January 20 th , February 24 th , March 23 rd , April 20 th , May 25 th , and June 8 th . f. Family Fun Days. This year, these are scheduled on October 2 nd and June 10 th . g. Second Cup of Coffee - follow-up breakfast meeting for parents who were unable to attend the last Parent-Teacher Association meeting. h. Rosetta Stone on Saturdays - Parents come with their children to learn English using Rosetta Stone in the school Computer Lab. i. Awards Night - Parents of high-achieving students are invited to the Semi-Annual Awards Night of the school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 95 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Alexandra Hernandez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 96  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 RSCEP-R 97  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 19K583 School Name: Multicultural High School Superintendent: Janice Ross The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Maria Verrilli ELL Coordinator YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Because we screen for language, all of our students are Spanish-Speaking and we offer a transitional bilingual program. We utilize parent interviews, HLIS, NYSITELL results and SIFE surveys to then determine appropriate placement in classes. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 98  Language Spanish and English. Written Preferred Percent Written Spanish and English Spanish and English Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish and English Spanish and English 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families All of our communication to parents is in Spanish. We send a variety of communication to parents including the following: Newsletters, Welcome letters, Announcements, Calendars, Event Invitations, Attendance Letters, Progress to Graduation Notifications, Regents Invitations, After School Program Information, Testing Dates, Field Trip notifications and all letters from leadership, guidance, dean and parent coordinator. Monthly translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The majority of our staff is bilingual. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 99  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school It's difficult to quantify how many meetings we have with families. We estimate that on average every student has at least 12 formal interactions a year, all interactions are conducted in Spanish. Monthly plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We have bilingual personnel. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Yes. Our staff is bilingual. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We ensure that our families have access to all information in both English and Spanish. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will continue to provide our parents with support with interpretation and translation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Survey. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 100 
