2018-19 RENEWAL SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (RSCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 14K610 School Name: AUTOMOTIVE HIGH SCHOOL Principal: NEIL HARRIS 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Automotive High School 14k610 331400011610 9 - 12 School Number (DBN): 50 Bedford Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11222 718-218-9301 718 599-4351 Fax: Email Address: nharris14@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: Neil Harris School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Geographical District: 14 Superintendent’s Office Address: Counseling In Schools Neil Harris Johnny Chavarria Jeanette Acevedo Vanessa Roser Tonya Adison Magalie Baron-Jeanty Maria Santos Ingrid Santiago District Information Janice Ross Superintendent: 1396 Broadway Brooklyn, NY 11221 jross11@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 7184554635 Phone Number: 7189999999 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 3  Borough North Field SC FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 LivingstonStreet Executive Director’s Office Address: Brooklyn, NY 11201 bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. School Receivership In April 2015, state lawmakers and Governor Andrew Cuomo created section 211-f of the State Education Law, which established the School Receivership program as a new intervention strategy to turn around struggling schools. This new law, and Commissioner’s regulation 100.19, requires that “Persistently Struggling Schools,” defined as Priority Schools that have been in the most severe accountability status since the 2006-07 school year, be given an initial one or two-year period under a “Superintendent Receiver”. These schools were placed in receivership under the New York City Schools Chancellor. Each school must make demonstrable improvement on specific benchmarks or it will be placed under an independent receiver. Under the Chancellor’s Receivership Plan, the School Renewal Program is NYCDOE’s 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 5  core strategy for turning around struggling schools. Renewal Schools have already begun implementing significant interventions and are receiving additional resources and support to accelerate student performance and help close achievement gaps reflected in this RSCEP. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 6  The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 7  School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 8  Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Name Position and Constituent Group Neil Harris Jeanette Acevedo Vanessa Roser Magalie Baron-Jeanty Johnny Chavarria Maria Santos Ingrid Santiago Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 10  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y -Y - - - Odelle Walker Pescatello - - - - Parent Parent Parent Staff Staff Staff Student Parent Staff/Parent/Othe Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Community Engagement Team (CET) Signature Page Directions: Please fill out this form and indicate members of your Community Engagement Team. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each Community Engagement Team member in the first column. 2. Record the position and constituent group represented in the second column. 3. Community Engagement Team members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If a Community Engagement Team member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original signature page. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Neil S. Harris Tonya Adison Johnny Chavarria 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Principal Assistant Principal Community Based Organization 11  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Amir Femi Parent Coordinator x x x -x -x - - - - - - x x x -x -x - - - - - - 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 12  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. Contextual Information: Automotive High School (AHS) was designated an Out of Time (OOT) school in the academic year 2014-2015 and designated a focus school during the 2017-2018 school year under the New York City Renewal Schools Program. The Renewal program, anchored in supporting the development of both the teaching and administrative staff via embedded professional development. The instructional staff receives this support through the integration of instructional coaches in mathematics, ELA, and social studies coupled with external professional development anchored in inquiry. AHS's administration supported by embedded professional development in the form of Directors of School Renewal (DSR) and monthly meetings where all Renewal leaders convene. Additional support is provided by the DSR assigned by the Brooklyn North Superintendency. AHS is located in the Greenpoint section of Brooklyn and is one of the oldest Career and Technical Education (CTE) schools in New York City. Once the premier CTE school in the Department of Education (DOE), AHS has existed for nearly a century and serves a population that is over 90% young men of color. Although AHS is the only high school in the 11222 zip code, 3% of our student population live within the zip code. In fact, the average travel time for students at AHS is between 30 and 50 minutes. Students travel from Crown Heights, Bedford-Stuyvesant, East New York, Brownsville, and the Ridgewood/Bushwick neighborhoods of Brooklyn, as well as from Manhattan, the Bronx, and occasionally Staten Island. Our mission, which continues to evolve as our school community evolves, is to equip our students with the academic, social, and emotional skills required to be college and career ready including intellectual curiosity, personal responsibility, and the confidence to succeed. Our partnership with Counseling in Schools (CiS) has helped our young men to develop a more refined understanding of what it means to be both men and citizens. Moreover, our partnerships with the Greater New York Dealers Association (GNYADA), New York City Fleet Services (NYCFS), and NYPD have developed our young men’s understanding of service and labor. Beliefs about Student Learning: AHS students are resilient and hungry to learn, however, their desire for the latter is often hampered by negative academic experiences as well as socio-emotional challenges that work in opposition to the lessons that they are taught in school. In this vein, our learning community is committed to supporting our students in achieving self-determination as well as academic success through an individualized approach to education punctuated by a variety of structures that support their academic and socio-emotional needs. Moreover, we believe that a key lever to school improvement, specifically in the area of student outcomes, resides in giving students a choice and making learning relevant. We accomplish this end by remaining faithful to the foundation on which our school was founded, “(wo)manhood, service, labor, and citizenship” by also reminding students that they are “Driven to Great.” 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 13  Our collective belief is that when educators, families, and community groups work collaboratively to support learning, students tend to stay engaged, stay in school longer, and become active participants in their educational experience, as opposed to being passive recipients. AHS provides a welcoming environment for all members of our learning community, including families and visitors, by ensuring that everyone is treated respectfully and that all voices are heard. AHS is a learning community where students are known as individuals, receive personalized counseling, both academic and socio-emotional, and have the opportunity to engage in instruction anchored in inquiry, problem-solving, and relevant, real-world tasks. Moreover, students are given the opportunity to reflect on their academic successes and challenges as well as their socio-emotional experiences. Reflection, in our estimation, is the heart of learning. Our goal, therefore, is for our students to construct the knowledge, skills, and habits of mind necessary to succeed both at AHS as well as in their post-secondary endeavors, which will ultimately support their success in the 21 st century global marketplace. Special Student Populations: AHS community is comprised of a student body that is 90% male and 97% young men of color. The education of young people, specifically young men of color, requires instruction that is anchored in relevance and disseminated by instructors that value inter-personal relationships. The young men at AHS are primarily visual and kinesthetic learners, which indicates that instructional methodology must be anchored in these modalities to engage learners. Traditionally, approximately 15% of AHS's incoming students are over-aged, which signals that these students have experienced academic and/or socio-emotional challenges before coming to AHS. Educating these students requires their re-engagement as well as consistent positive reinforcement to support increasing their confidence. The methodology for achieving this end is ensuring that data is used to identify strengths and challenges and that scaffolds, which reflect the data, are integrated into the naturally occurring curriculum with which the students will engage. A large percentage of the students at AHS enter 9th grade at Level 2 in both literacy and numeracy. Thirty-three percent of students at AHS are classified as students with disabilities (SWDs), and approximately eight percent are classified as ENLs. These data points indicate that the implementation of grade level curricula must be adjusted to meet students where they are while incorporating the appropriate level of rigor to support student growth. Historical Successes and Challenges: AHS, which has historically been identified as an “Impact” school, has traditionally struggled with creating a culture and tone conducive to teaching and learning. The challenge in this realm was and continues to be two-fold, creating and sustaining a supportive environment and developing and implementing rigorous instruction. The former is an area of success at AHS. Our learning community has made great strides in improving the culture and tone of our building by creating, implementing, monitoring, and revising rituals and routines for all stakeholders. An emphasis has been placed on developing relationships between students and faculty/support staff and between students. All has improved with the integration of coherent curricula as evident in the 2017-2018 quality review where AHS received Proficient or Well-Developed in all indicators . However, the need to strengthen pedagogy and assessment persists as evident to ensure all students are prepared for college or the work force. AHS continues to focus on he pedagogical practices that ensure thoughtful grouping, pacing, student engagement and rigor. Moreover, systems and structures for ongoing formative assessment are in place and are continuously tweaked to address academic outcomes for all students. Community-Based Organization: Counseling in Schools (CiS), our Community School Partner has been an integral 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 14  component of our school community since January 2012. In 2017-2018 the focus of CiS's work was three-pronged. First, support the most at-risk young men and women in our learning community through structured meeting and group therapy. Second, support the attendance initiative to ensure students engage in school and classes consistently. Third, to support the integration of Restorative Practices for habitual offenders of the New York City discipline code. Our collective efforts have resulted in improved outcomes about our primary focus, which is evidenced by the consistent reduction of suspensions and violent incidents in our learning community since 2011. Expanded Learning Time: AHS has created a student schedule that builds five hours of the expanded learning time (ELT) directly into students' schedules, as part of their regular academic program daily. Additional time on task is effected via an expanded student program, which allows for an additional instructional period Monday through Friday. Additionally, students are provided with enrichment activities, daily, including clubs, tutoring, homework help, and SAT Prep. Extra-curricular activities, including, but not limited to tutoring, athletics, and student-generated clubs, that will also be available daily. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 15  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 14K610 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 399 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 46 49 6 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 48 36 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 77.4% % Reduced Lunch 9.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 38.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.13 0% 42% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 71% 55% 73.8% 2.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups - Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES No N/A 115 97 14 82.1% 2.5% 32.8% 53.1% 3.0% 2.5% 4 21% 5.5 N/A N/A 76% 60% 62.6% 0% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 16  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Priority Needs (PPR, QR, SQG, SRI Needs Assessment, School Survey): 1. A vertically coherent and systemic curriculum (which includes units/modules, learning activities, and student embedded student assessments/products as modeled by the EngageNY approach) aligned to the standards, integrated with academy themes where appropriate, is necessary across the content areas 2. An enacted curricula that provide cognitively rigorous tasks, attached to clear learning objectives and based on the CCLS standards, are needed consistently across the curricula as many students struggled on open ended response questions as evident in regents results across all content areas. 3. Pedagogy that is responsive to individual students’ needs, as evidenced by student data, providing the appropriate remediation, and multiple entry points that result in the vast majority of students learning. Evidence indicated that all students had the same entry point minimizing individualized learning needs for students that essentially impacted test results 4. Pedagogy that provides specific, actionable feedback, anchored in discipline-based rubrics, to all students so they can improve their work products specifically for SWD and ENL students. 5. Pedagogy that provides checks for understanding that ensure the vast majority of students learn everyday through strategic standard aligned checklists. Areas of Celebration/Systems in place (AIR, QR, SRI Needs Assessment): 1. EngageNY is currently being effectively implemented in all Math and ELA courses. A CCLS-aligned SS curricula is being implemented in Global History that prepares students for the revised global regents. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 18  2. Student data, including but not limited to standardized and local assessments, is being analyzed through Looking at Student Work (LASW) in an effort to refine curricula and close achievement gaps. Data Trends The following Data trends will be analyzed: 1. NYSED Reportcard Data 2. NYC Quality Review Data 3. School Performance Dashboard Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? If teachers are supported in creating a sequence of learning activities that follow a coherent sequence aligned to instructional goals, designed to engage students in high-level cognitive activities, in an environment where students and teachers are highly respected and cared for, all students will be intellectually engaged in content challenging well designed learning tasks. Vision for Promoting the Instructional Focus:  Ensure that instructional foci are designed and assigned through the lens of equity.  Ensure the implementation, monitoring, and revision of CCLS curricula across content areas  Ensure the integration of formative assessment that is monitored by rubrics and includes actionable feedback  Ensure that students are active participants in their learning, which is evidenced by their ability to speak (verbally and/or in writing) to what they are learning, how they are learning, why they are learning, and where they can improve  Ensure the implementation of high-level performance-based tasks in all major content areas at least three times per semester  Ensure that lesson plans include instructional objectives (IO) that contain a specific “by” that render them measurable as described by the Danielson Framework  Ensure the triangulation between IO, learning activities, and CCLS/ NYS learning standards  Ensure the Integration of reading, writing, speaking, and listening in all classes  Ensure the Implementation of inquiry as the major vehicle of learning across content areas in all classrooms  Ensure the integration of student-centered approaches to instruction that provides students with opportunities to interact directly with the new learning, fashion exploratory questions, and engage in talk-moves and discussion protocols (think-pair-share, Socratic Seminars, etc) to increase student engagement  Ensure the creation, implementation, monitoring, and revision of uniform assessment calendar, which includes benchmarks, mid-terms, and finals, as well a multiple forms of formative assessment What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 19  CCLS aligned curricula, specifically Alek, Discovery, specific components of Engage NY in ELA and mathematics and New Visions for history and science will be reviewed and refined to create entry points based on student data, IEP data and student interest. Teachers will collaborate departmentally to identify texts and activities, which reflect the cultural diversity of AHS as well as take into consideration students' interests and allow for student choice. Students engaged in Advanced Placement courses utilize curriculum provided by Advanced Placement for All and Laying the Foundation. This year AHS is considering using AP curriculum to anchor all content disciplines for non AP courses. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? In 2019-2020 all Students will have access to Advanced Placement courses, CTE sequences, and traditional coursework that supports the development and strengthening of students communication skills, primarily speaking and writing, a key component for career and college readiness. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Multiple entry points for all learners will be embedded into lesson plans, with supports for SWDs specifically aligned to students IEPs. Levelled texts will be integrated to ensure that tasks are rigorous but that students are not prohibited from engaging in the tasks as a result of not being able to comprehend texts. Lastly, student choice will be incorporated to support that all students can access the material. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Assessment, a key component to effective instruction, will be ongoing and include uniform summative assessment as well as formative assessment. Students will be given immediate, actionable feedback anchored in rubrics and checklists. Teachers will ensure that students are aware of how to improve their work and students will be able to articulate that understanding. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) Baseline Diagnostic Mid-term Formative Final Formative Performance Task Summative All All All All Determine baseline of through use of ALEK, Gates-MacGintie Determine growth from baseline and internalization of material covered through mid term. Determine growth from midterm and of material covered through the semester. Determine students ability to analyze and synthesize learning that took place throughout the semester. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 20  Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. CCLS and/or Advance Placement utilizing the GRASPS model (Goal, Role, Audience, Situation, Product or Performance, Standards) or case study model in the content areas of English, Mathematics, History and Science. Supervision Assistant Principals will work with departmental instructional leads to develop inter-disciplinary units. Evidence of Success:  By January 2019 all students will successfully complete a minimum of one performance based tasks aligned to   AP or CCLS in each content area. Students have opportunities for revisions on their performance tasks based on actionable and timely feedback from their peers and teachers Students will memorialize their work products and results in a classroom-based portfolio in order to self-reflect on their progress over time  By June 2019 all students will successfully complete a minimum of three performance based tasks aligned to AP or CCLS in each content area. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? Improvement in teacher ratings Graduation Credit accumulation Attendance 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 21 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All content area teachers, supervisors and coaches. Credit accumulation, graduation, Regents completion August 2018 through June 2019 Teachers Support Staff Administrators Guidance Counselors Renewal team Consultants How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in the number of students achieving proficiency on the skills required by the standards aligned to the Performance tasks through the use of standards aligned checklists and rubrics. Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Professional Development (PD) Plan: AHS will create, execute, monitor, and revise a systematic PD plan that consists of small group, whole group, and individual components. The scope of work for PD will be anchored in data stemming from individual coaching and observation cycles and inquiry based on the DataWise process. The analyzed data will be used to support the construction and implementation of performance based assessments. A PD committee (consisting of UFT members, Renewal coaches, consultants and school leaders) will be responsible for the continued development, implementation, monitoring, and revision of the PD calendar. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 22  Student Programming: Students All students will have access to seven hour and 20-minute instructional day inclusive of lunch. A full sequence of CTE, AP, and elective courses will be reviewed to determine fy 2019 course of study. An effort will be made to ensure that SWDs are programmed in the Least Restrictive Environment (LRE) possible, which will be evidenced by the reduction of self-contained classes. ENLs, specifically those classified as Intermediate and Advanced, will be programmed for push-in ENL support. CCLS and/or AP aligned performance tasks will be administered to students at a minimum of three times a semester in each content areas. In order to ensure that these tasks are created and administered throughout the school year, teachers will create Students Faculty Credit accumulation, Regents completion, and graduation Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Teachers Support Staff Administrators Students Parents CBOsThink Through Math 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 23 Credit accumulation, Regents completion, and graduation September 2018 through June 2019 Teachers Support Staff Administrators Students Parents CBOs Guidance Counselors SRI team -Progress will be monitored through weekly attendance meetings -Programming meetings will take place every marking period with GCs and the school programmer/SPED coordinator to ensure that students are in the correct courses, and plan to make necessary adjustments when needed. Teachers will receive training for Renewal school AIS programs in order to ensure the fidelity of the programs and check in with the TTM and REWARDS program representatives. Specific standards will be readdressed within performance tasks. Students should demonstrate growth in these specific areas quarterly as evidenced by student portfolios Rewards Reading Program and work products. Guidance Counselors SRI team their performance tasks with their department members during their C6R daily meetings with their leads. DoE Benchmark assessments will be administered to all students by October 31, 2018. Four full periods, CCLS/ Regents aligned, unified assessments will be administered per Semester. Assessment results will be analyzed by respective departments/teams to identify curricular adjustments that require implementation. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 24  ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. The resources that follow will be needed to achieve the aforementioned goal: curricula in all core content areas   professional development for faculty on creating entry points for AHS students within the EngageNY curricula, data analysis, teaming, inquiry, developing IOs, and restorative practices content coaches and consultants: ELA, mathematics, SS, and special education splitting teachers' professional period (C6R) duties to include both Common Planning Time (CPT) and department meetings additional teachers in math, ELA, and social studies to reduce class size    Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The mid-point benchmarks listed below will indicate progress toward meeting the aforementioned goals:  By February 2019 75% of 9th and 10th graders will have accumulated five or more credits  By February 2019 80% of 9th and 10th graders, 75% of 11th graders, and 65% of 12th graders will have complete a minimum of two CCLS aligned performance task  By February 2019 100% of the teaching staff will have received professional development in any of the following: How to create rubrics, offering actionable feedback, writing measurable IOs, creating, administering, and revising performance tasks, unpacking the EngageNY curricula, and/or understanding the Danielson Framework  By February 2019 100% of the teaching staff will have been observed, following ADVANCE, a minimum of two times.  By February 2019, 100% of the teaching staff would have completed at least one round of intervisitations  Student progress will be monitored through the use of student performance task portfolios that are standards aligned to show progress from on a scale from 1-4. STARS, ATS, ADVANCE, Teachscape, Skedula and New Visions Tracking tools will be used to track progress. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 25  Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instruction of measure will be Advance Data for the teaching staff as well as progress report and report card grades for students. Advance data will highlight student progress in components 1E, 2B, and 3C as portfolios will be examined as part of all formal and informal observations. Surveys will be administered to staff to determine their feedback on professional development offerings. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Priority Areas (Quality Review, PPR visits 2017-2018) 1. Develop a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and the Danielson Framework 2. Develop a uniform system of assessment to ensure that students receive actionable feedback on how to improve their work 3. Create, implement, monitor, and revise a uniform approach to classroom norms across content areas and grades to ensure that all students understand what it means to be a student at AHS Areas of Celebration (Quality Review, PPR 2017-2018): 1. Well defined rituals and routines to sustain students’ social and emotional health and safety 2. Decreased rate of incidence 3. Articulated vision for social and emotional development of students 4. Structures in place to respond to students’ socio-emotional needs Through the use of restorative practices and Counseling in Schools students are supported throughout the school day for their social and emotional needs. Students have access to additional social workers throughout the day for various 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 27  needs. AHS has also worked to reduce class size for most classes to ensure additional support in classrooms for all students. The school survey indicates that students feel safe in the environment and have an individual that they can speak to regularly but lack challenge by their teachers in content and questioning. In the 2018 Quality Review, students also mentioned that they feel supported in the classrooms by all teachers and administrators. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? Overarching Vision for Supportive Environment at AHS: AHS is committed to meeting the social-emotional needs of students so that there is a culture of college and career readiness for all students, which is exemplified by opportunities for students to engage in self-advocacy, development their character, and respond to high academic expectations. In order to impact the social and emotional development of all students at AHS there must be an emphasis on developing students’ social and emotional awareness. Stakeholders will describe AHS as a safe, nurturing environment that supports the needs of all constituents and fosters civic and academic excellence through choice and collaboration. AHS's CBO 's CiS will work collaboratively with the greater school community to create a support system that meets the needs of all constituents. CiS will sit on the Cabinet, Attendance Team, Youth Development Team, and at times attend grade level and department meetings. The expectation is that all members of our learning community will take an active role in creating a nurturing environment that fosters direct communication and interaction with families and caregivers. To that extent, we have created a series of structures and practices that we consider an integral part of the socio-emotional development of all stakeholders within the AHS school community: Individualized programming  Restorative practices   Pupil Personnel Team  Attendance Team  Youth Development Team Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner CBO Focus Counseling in Schools Restorative Practices, Social-Emotional support, Extra-Curricular offerings during and after the school day, family outreach through the implementation of Family Resource Center. N/A N/A How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 28  A primary goal for both CBOs will be to develop and support structures that will increase family engagement with an eye on improving student outcomes, specifically measured by increased attendance and the reduction of Level 4 and 5 incidents. CBO will host SEL supports during student lunch. CBO will facilitate restorative practices. CBO will facilitate after school clubs. CBO will host event to support families within the AHS community. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. AHS will implement a coherent ladder of referral with opportunities to refine the improved culture for learning, for both students and teachers, that currently exists through the more systemic implementation of the aforementioned structures whose purpose is meant to promote a supportive environment. By June 2019, AHS will implement a schoolwide School Intervention and Crisis Intervention team that meet monthly as a structure to promote a positive school environment. Evidence of Success:  By June 2019, the school will increase the attendance rate from 82.5% to 84%  By June 2019, Principals suspensions will decrease by 5% when compared to June 2018  By June 2019, students will participate in additional intervention as alternatives to suspensions demonstrating progressive discipline.  By June 2019, increase in the College Ready Index by 8% with support of college-bound organization. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? Reduction in class and out of class incidents Improvement in Attendance Credit accumulation Graduation 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 29 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Attendance The AHS community at large September 2018 through June 2019 Administration, CBO staff, teachers, Guidance team How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in attendance and reduction of suspensions through progressive discipline approach. Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Restorative Practices: AHS will continue to develop the efficacy of the Youth Development Team (YDT). The YDT will consist of the administration, youth development officers, School Safety Agents (SSAs), guidance counselors (when possible), and social worker (when possible), and CiS The YDT will be responsible for supporting, facilitating and executing restorative justice practices and protocols within the AHS community. The SLT recommended to implement opportunities for social-emotional learning and giving students a voice to strengthen its discipline protocol. Additionally, students 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 30  will be paired up with a peer based on grade level to foster relationships that will encourage positive behavior. Lastly, self care for teachers and effective communication with school safety will help to develop positive relationships. Activities: student breakfast student incentives student trips awards celebrations Attendance Team: AHS will strengthen the attendance team responsible for tracking attendance data in short cycles leading to early interventions before students disconnect from schools. The focus of the team will be to address those students whose attendance is between 55% and 79%. The team, which will be comprised of teachers, support staff, CBO, guidance team, and administration will meet weekly. Minutes Administration, Guidance Counselors, Social Worker, Attendance Aide, Attendance teacher Attendance, Credit accumulation, Regents completion, and graduation September 2018 through June 2019 Teachers Support Staff Administrators Increase in attendance Students Families CBOs Guidance Counselors Social Worker Attendance 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 31  from the team meeting will be shared with the community at large. The SLT came up with various strategies for the improvement of student attendance by implementing a morning breakfast theme which will include a warm and welcoming environment by playing music in the morning. The team will send communication to parents when students are on time. Additionally, teachers are encouraged to give these students recognition for being on time. - - - - - - - - - 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 32  ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources needed to see the aforementioned goal to fruition are listed below:  Additional CBO whose focus will be increasing attendance Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Progress toward the aforementioned goal will be evidenced by the following:  By February 2019, the school will increase the attendance rate by 1.% when compared to February 2018  By February 2019, Principals suspensions will decrease by 2% when compared to February 2018.  By February 2019, attendance for all cohorts will increase by 2% Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The New Visions Attendance Heat tracker will be used to assess progress. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: X SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus:   Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section.   What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review?  NYSED School Report Card data Student Survey Data   Quality Review DAta Areas of Celebration: Teachers on grade level and department teams collaboratively use data to improve student outcomes. The grade level teams' focus was on the integration and refinement of WITsi strategies as evidenced by students' movement on Tennis Charts. Department teams' focus was on looking at student work with an eye on refining pacing and tasks. All teams met 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 34  a minimum of twice a week to analyze student work, discuss targeted interventions, adjust instruction and tasks, and re-assess mastery of target skills. Priority Needs: According to the 2018 Quality Review AHS would benefit from aligning curricula, use of on-going assessment and analysis of information on student learning outcomes to make clear adjustments and instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? Collaborative teaching will be evidenced by dedicated meeting time, facilitated by a teacher leader, using specific protocols anchored in reviewing student work. AHS strategically paired Special Education teachers with one content teacher to streamline instruction and reduce teacher burnout from having to plan with multiple co-teachers allowing administrators to assess teacher pedagogical practices on ICT classes effectively. Data will be analyzed using a combination of Strategic Inquiry and Datawise methodologies. Agendas and minutes will be kept, and all stakeholders will be accountable for next steps as data trends will be shared with the greater AHS community monthly during content team meetings. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? Collaboration among the Instructional Cabinet will utilize the same structures as collaboration on teacher teams, however, the primary focus will be on teacher growth as evidenced by student outcomes within specific content teams. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Lead teachers in each department/content area will serve as the nucleus for teacher teams. Teams will have the autonomy to decide on the division of labor and the norms for their teams. All teams will uniformly look at data using Strategic Inquiry and Datawise protocols with an eye on improving student outcomes vertically and horizontally. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Vertical articulation across departments will be facilitated by the sharing of data stemming from content teams through structured meetings with department leads and administration. The collaboration will also occur on dedicated professional development time on Monday afternoons once per month. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 35  Data Reviewed Intent Advance Data To determine movement of teacher practice in specific areas of focus. Student scholarship reports TeachBoost Part 3 – Annual Goal To determine the impact of teacher practice on student outcomes. Teach Boost: To determine if feedback from provided “next steps” were implemented during future instructional rounds, and use data from the platform to determine instructional trends. Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, content and grade level team will meet once monthly using department level inquiry data to develop and support instructional practices aligned to effective planning and assessment practices as rated by the Danielson Framework for Teaching through the lens of equity. Evidence of Success:  By June 2019, the overall Regents completion rate will increase from 35.2% to 39%.  By June 2019, the school will receive a "Well Developed" in QR indicator 4.2 (Teacher Teams).  By June 2019, 80% of teachers will have receive earned a effective or highly effective in 1E and 3C for 2 or more observations Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? College Readiness Index Credit Accumulation Regents Completion Graduation 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 36  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Create teacher programs that facilitate department meetings. most teachers are free period 8 to support collaboration. Create, implement, monitor, and revise an observation calendar whose focus will be on frequent cycles of observation with on eye on Domains 3C with captured data on Teachboost Continue development of Cabinet Inquiry team that includes essential instructional stakeholders to improve teaching practices based on cycles of observing, coaching, and Advance data to determine important skills that need further support. Held during period 8. AHS Instructional calendar Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers Credit accumulation, Regents completion, and graduation September 2018 Faculty, Administration, CiS, HSRI team coaches, Metamorphosis coaches, Special Education coaches All teachers Credit accumulation, Regents completion, and graduation Sept.2018 - June 2019 Administration and HSRI coaches All teachers Credit accumulation, Regents completion, and graduation Sept.2018 - June 2019 Department Leads, Administration, DSR How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Teacher teams will provide minutes of their meetings aligned to the instructional focus of the school and the agreed upon values of the department Increase in individual teacher practice between initial observation #1 and observation #2 - 4. Impact is tracked through the DataWise Inquiry cycle to measure teacher impact and provide additional support school wide. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 37  Weekly Meetings a. Admin Cabinet b. Instructional Cabinet c. Teacher Lead meeting. d. Horizontal and vertical team meetings. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 38  The resources that follow are necessary in order to achieve the aforementioned goal:  programmatic structures allowing for CPT  Datawise training for staff  College Access for All funding to engage staff in AP training aligned to AP standards  Title I funds to funds consultants to support pedagogical improvements Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The following mid-point benchmarks will serve as indicators of movement toward the aforementioned goals:  By September 2018, programmatic structures will be in place to facilitate departmental teams  By December 2018, departmental teams will have collaboratively created, implemented, monitored and revised a minimum of two performance task for all students across content areas  By October 2018, coaches and consultants will be assigned to teachers and teachers will have created individualized action plans aligned to instructional focus and department agreed upon values.  By October 2018, the administrative team will develop an observation calendar, which includes evaluative and non-evaluative visits Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance data, Google docs (minutes and agendas), and Individual action plans will be instruments of measure. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 39  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Priority Needs: (AIR, SRI Needs Assessment, PPR, QR - 2018):  Goals, which have been established using data, were not collaborated upon by all members of the learning community  The cycle of observation was calendarized but not followed the entire year.  The cycle of observation, which includes targeted, actionable feedback, is not consistently anchored in student data or student work  The scope of work of the learning community’s CBOs is not transparent to all members of the learning community  Goal setting for individual students does not currently exist in a pervasive way Areas of Celebration: (AIR, SRI Needs Assessment, PPR, QR - 2018):  The administrative team utilizes data to inform programmatic, human and fiscal capital resources to improve student outcomes and culture and tone  Norming of observations and feedback takes place multiple times throughout the year  Expectations, which are aligned with the school’s mission and vision, are transparent to all members of the learning community  There has been some development of teacher leaders 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 40   IPCs, mid-year, and EOY discussions are part of the school culture DATA Trends STARS, ATS, ADVANCE Data,  NYSED Accountabiity Data   Quality Review Data  Qualitative Data (Direct school Support) Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? AHS is committed to cultivating a reciprocal learning environment that characterized by shared decision making and leadership with a mutual accountability. Leadership has and will continue to encourage and ensure opportunities for open communication and collaboration and will be engaged in shared decision-making with mutual accountability and reciprocity. Leadership will build infrastructures that support high standards for quality instruction. School leaders will create a culture of high expectations and articulate an instructional focus that is reflective of students' academic needs and how teachers will get them there. School leaders will ensure that students have the supports to meet the culture of high expectations and be college and career ready. School leaders will support the improvement of teacher practice through structured collaborative inquiry, teacher inter-visitations, cycles of frequent observations followed up with timely feedback that is accurate, time bound. All instructional supervisors will provide models of effective instruction through professional development and modeling. Leadership will engage with all constituents in activities and discussions related to the school's mission, vision, core values, and collaborate on ways in which to increase and/or improve faculty communication. Leadership will be characterized by a”lead by example” mentality that requires all stakeholders to be help message the core values of the school and make every decision with integrity and compassion. Infrastructure Supporting Quality Instruction The observation approach will be both formative and evaluative. The formative observations will utilize Santoya’s methodology and evaluative observation will follow the rules and regulations of Advance. The expectation is that the administrative team will be in classrooms daily, offering actionable feedback. That feedback will be delivered verbally as well as in writing when appropriate following Advance guidelines.  Data stemming from observations will be used to inform adjustments to the PD schedule  Department leads will be expected to participate in weekly Leadership Team meetings  Goals setting, mid-year discussions, and EOY discussions will help to frame, support, and monitor teacher growth  Professional development plans will be created collaboratively with each member of the learning community  Goals setting, mid-year discussions and EOY discussions will help to frame, support, and monitor student growth  The school will continue to utilize electronic grade books  Cabinet inquiry will be anchored in data review, including but not limited to scholarship, attendance, and YD  Data will serve as the focal point for all community meetings   Training sessions to support families in navigating data will be included in PTA meetings   Student programs will be addressed individually utilizing transcripts and data from high-stakes assessments Student programs will be reviewed with an eye on ensuring that “chemistry” is not a prohibitive factor in disseminating instruction Families will have access to student data via electronic platforms 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 41  Educators will have one opportunity a term to reflect on past practice, identify areas in need of support and determine particular future supports or assistance with the Principal.  Observations will be conducted in a spirit of development and collaboration. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? Attention will be paid to developing and nurturing teacher leaders but also working with stronger teachers to improve their practice What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? At AHS, we start with why before we get to why and what. This process or strategy has provided opportunities for the school community to develop a better understanding and passion for the students that we serve. The values of departments, the mission of the school and data drives the creation of the instructional focus which will be monitored throughout the year. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Leadership will be developed based on teacher interest and capacity. Teacher leaders such as Peer Collaborative Teachers, Model Teachers and Department leads will serve as models for their colleagues to develop more leaders. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? Teacher leaders, CBOs, guidance, and support staff will play a prominent role in Cabinet Inquiry as well as the facilitation of school-wide meetings. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy Weekly Written feedback per UFTcontract. Verbal feedback within 48 hours of visit. Advance documents, previous observations, low inference notes, and student work products will be utilized to ensure accuracy and inform actionable feedback. What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Advance data Teacher practice Administration 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 42  Student data Teacher practice and student outcomes Administration, teacher leaders, guidance, CBO How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? Students' academic and socio-emotional needs will be the driving force behind student and teacher programs. Class size in mathematics and ELA will be reduced to ensure a smaller student to teacher ratio. Teacher power will be fully utilized thereby eliminating unnecessary personnel additions. Entire school is programmed for 1 session. English and Math department have common planning periods Smaller class size supports additional support. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019 Automotive High School will develop and implement a calendar of cyclical observations and learning walks ensuring all observations (both evaluative and non-evaluative) provide teachers with actionable feedback aligned to goals in domain 1 (components a-e) and domain 3 (components a-d ), with next steps for improvement, a minimum of 3 times. Evidence of Success:  By June 2019, the school will be rated proficient in Quality Review Components 1.2  By June 2019, a minimum of 60% of the teaching staff will have received an MOTP rating of "Effective".  By June 2019, 75 percent of teachers up for tenure will be approved. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Regents completion Credit accumulation Graduation 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 43  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. A calendar of observations, including Advance and non-Advance options, which will ensure that all teachers are observed by every member of the administrative team. Cabinet Inquiry to determine instructional focus areas that will support improved pedagogy and student outcomes. Professional Development aligned to Danielson Framework and Cabinet Inquiry n/a Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All pedagogues Regents completion, credit accumulation, and graduation 2018-2019 school year Administrative team All pedagogues Regents completion, credit accumulation, and graduation 2018-2019 school year Instructional Cabinet All pedagogues Improvement in overall school and teacher improvement in teacher pedagogy aligned to Danielson 1E, 3B, 3C, 3D 2018-2019 school year Instructional Cabinet, Consultants, HSRI How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in teacher practice in Domain 3 as evidenced by data from Advance. Increase in student outcomes on identified learning tasks as evidenced by student work products. Progress monitoring through Teachboost application n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 44  ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources listed below will be necessary to implement the action plan needed to meet the aforementioned goal:  Continuous Danielson training for administrative team  Book club reading material for all cabinet members Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. DANIELSON FRAMEWORK The benchmarks listed below will be indicators of progress toward the aforementioned goals:  By December 2018, the Instructional Cabinet will have convened a minimum of eight times 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 45   By January 2019, a minimum of 50% of observations have been conducted using the Teachboost and Advance platform. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance, Google docs, Teachboost Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 46  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and X provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review?  Ensure that all subgroups of students and their families can communicate reciprocally with the school; monitor the effectiveness of communication strategies with parents and address any issues or concerns  Ensure that PD is provided for staff that equips them with the skills and expertise to develop strong relationships with families; provide families with the tools and support to help them work with the school in improving academic achievement  Provide data that is accessible and understood by parents that will enable them to support and advocate for their child’s social and emotional developmental health and academic growth data sources Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, and NYC School Survey Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? Overarching Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties at AHS: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 47  AHS is committed to creating strong family and community ties through a genuine partnership grounded in choice, voice and collaboration in an effort to increase student achievement. AHS believes when educators, parents and community groups work collaboratively to support learning, students tend to stay engaged, stay in school longer, enjoy their school experience. AHS has developed multiple tools for regular communication with scholars and families to foster their high expectations for student academic achievement. AHS provides a welcoming environment for all members of our learning community, including families and visitors, by ensuring that everyone is treated respectfully and that all voices are heard. AHS’s communication is reciprocal, on-going, and varied. In addition, the school leadership has ensured that there is regular communication between the school and its students and families and that this communication informs families of the high expectations for student academic achievement and social-emotional development. In order to enrich the culture of the school and advance the civic life of our school building families at AHS will have multiple avenues to engage with the greater community to address challenges, support student development, and celebrate learning and student growth and accomplishments. In order to increase family and community engagement, AHS is committed to utilizing all of the following conduits for building strong family and community relations to support scholar achievement:  Communication: Collaborative Learning Environment Technology, family engagement block, targeted family and community outreach, community newsletters, internal needs assessment (survey), three week cycle of academic feedback, celebratory events anchored in academic achievement, civic growth, and socio-emotional growth, quarterly gatherings geared at building community. A family resource room has been created to formalize communication with families, including the outreach tool of Kinvolved, a new website and increased parental usage of Skedula.  Collaboration: Family Workshops, Family Center, On-line resources, community building events, technology,  college application and financial-aid workshops, and other supports identified by families Support: CiS facilitate supports for families in crisis, pathways to graduation: individual parent conferences, learning at home strategies, adult education (introductory auto repair, welding, technology certificates) The intended impact will be increase Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? The Parent Coordinator will welcome families into our school. There will be a dedicated family resource room within our school, which will be housed in room 110. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Surveys will be used to identify and develop families to take leadership roles. Our Parent Coordinator will identify key families through weekly contact. Lastly, our school functions such as parent-teacher conferences, parent association meetings consistently provide opportunities for families to engage in the school leadership roles and directly speak with key school stakeholders. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 48  How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? The school will communicate with families using telephone, email, brochures, Kinvolved, Website, and Skedula. These sources provide families with school data/information. Skedula provides real time information to inform parents with grade and attendance data. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Skedula School website Kinvolved Keeps families aware of student outcomes Keeps families aware of the day to day happening in the school community App available for cell phones where parents receive text messages from teachers. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Family room in room 110 Family partnerships with CBO: Counseling in Schools Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? We are open to pursuing the possibility of offering adult education classes within the school community. Its our vision to become a community resources to support the entire community. GED classes, healthcare and social justice initiatives. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? Skedula, transcript review nights, and back to school night will support families in ensuring that they are knowledgeable of their children's academic success. Parents receive mail copies of all grade correspondence the mailings including progress reports and report cards. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 49 AHS will implement a unified system of family outreach, which includes opportunities for families to participate in decision making, learning, and celebrations throughout the academic year. By hosting 10 monthly PTA meetings implementing a minimum of 3 surveys. Evidence of Success:  By January 2019, there will be an increase in the number of families who attend Fall Parent Teacher Conferences by 15 % (18 families).  There will be a minimum of four awards ceremonies by June 2019.  There will be a minimum of four community building events by June 2019.  By June 2019, there will be an increase in the number of families who attend Spring Parent Teacher Conferences by 3% Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Attendance Graduation Credit Accumulation 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 50  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in the number of parents indicating that they are well informed regarding their child's academic success on the School Survey. Family Engagement Block: Internal and external community Attendance and Safety September 2018 through June 2019 Administration, guidance team, CBOs, teachers Teachers will use Family Engagement Tuesdays to communicate with families via telephone, email, face to face, and/or written correspondence including but not limited to memos, newsletters, or letters. Teachers will document all outreach on Skedula every tuesday. Community Outreach: AHS will create an informational pamphlet that will include the new expectations of an AHS student as well as highlight programs and areas of celebration within school community. This pamphlet will be presented to the community board members at the community board meetings with the Internal and external community Attendance and registration Administration, CBO, guidance team, Parent Coordinator, teachers September 2018 through February 2019 Increase in enrollment by 15% when compared to 2016-2017 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 51  intention of building support in the community as well as attracting local community scholars to the school. AHS will host an Open-House where prospective students, as well as community members, are invited to engage with the school community and receive informational materials regarding AHS. Principal will meeting local politicians a minimum of 2 times during 2018-2019 Community Building Events: School community will participate in monthly community gatherings to address school needs and trends, themes, issues in the larger context as well as community celebrations, fiestas and programs. In addition, AHS will host a 9th grade ice cream social for 9th grade scholars to get to know each other and participate in community building events. AHS will host a battle of the cohorts where each cohort works together with their advisors and participates in community building activities and relay races. Attendance Internal and external community September 2018 through June 2019 Administration, CBO, guidance team, Parent Coordinator, teachers Increase in participation to events by 5% when compared to 2016-2017 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 52  N/A n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The following resources will be needed to implement the aforementioned action plan:  Professional development from Central on increasing parent engagement specifically supporting the parent coordinator  Budget for celebrations  Building permits for celebrations  Additional staff members to take on initiatives. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By September 2018, Skedula, Kinvolved and Website will be made available to all stakeholders.  By February 2019, the school community will have hosted a minimum of three celebrations By June 2019, AHS will review parent surveys a minimum of 3 times. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Survey, attendance sheets, Skedula logs, Kinvolved data, Parent sign In sheets Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 53  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Automotive High School will provide students with the mandatory 5 additional hours of quality expanded learning time embedded in the regular school day on Monday through Friday. In addition, students will be provided with enrichment activities at the conclusion of each school day. Evidence of Success: ● By June 2019, the graduation rate for Automotive High School will be increase from 75% to 77.5% ● By June 2019, 85% of 9th and 10th graders will have gained at least 10 credits Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. flyers, incentives, conferencing. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 54   Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? AHS has created a student schedule that builds 5 hours of the expanded learning time (ELT), by way of increased time on task and direct instruction, into the regular part of the school day. In addition, students will be provided with enrichment activities at the conclusion of each school day from 2:45PM - 6:00PM on Monday through Friday. A semi-staggered teaching schedule will allow students to be programmed for nine periods of instruction, daily. Rites of Passage, the Young Women's Group, as well as mandated counseling (provided by our Social Worker) and additional counseling (provided by CiS counselors) will serve to promote increased attendance, reduce drop out rates, and ultimately improve students' ability to graduate on time. Moreover, the personalized attention created by the aforementioned programs will support students' socio-emotional growth, which will augment serves received in the traditional classroom setting. Tuesdays will be dedicated to Family Outreach. In addition, outreach will be made by the Parent Coordinator, teachers, and the administrative team via Skedula, newsletters, and phone blasts. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. The Principal and his cabinet will implement the ELT program that is built into the regular school day. The Principal and CBOs will collaboratively implement and oversee all additional ELT programs that are not embedded in the school day.  The Community Schools Director, Johnny Chavarria, will create a menu of offerings that speak to students' interests. These offerings will be available to students following academic interventions and enrichment.  The AHS school community, specifically the teaching and administrative staff, will monitor student attendance.  The Parent Coordinator, CiS, support staff, and guidance team, will make outreach to families regarding ELT offerings and attendance to mandatory academic support sessions.  The administrative team will contract with a tutoring company, skilled at provided Regents preparation, to facilitate targeted Regents preparation for the January and June Regents examination periods.  The AHS Cabinet will meet a minimum of weekly to discuss student progress. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 55   The AHS Youth Development team will meet a minimum of twice per month to discuss student progress. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The ELT program will be implemented in September 2018 and will conclude June 2019. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program.  Professional tutoring company for targeted Regents preparation  Regents preparation consumable materials  Refreshments for students  Computer based programs to support Regents preparation  Additional staff members to run after school activities. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks ● By February 2019, the graduation rate for Automotive High School will be on track for 60% ● By February 2019, 85% of 9th and 10th graders will be have accumulated a minimum of five credits. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Skedula, STARS Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 56  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. The student attendance rate at the end of the 2018-2019 will be 85% The student 4 year graduation rate will be 77.5% The student 6 year graduation rate will be 73% Regents completion rate will be 40% The 4 year college readiness rate will be 30% Student safety incidents will be reduced by 3% when compared to 2017. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Graduation Attendance Credit accumulation Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Counseling in Schools At Risk Males Counseling in Schools Attendance Individual & Group Counseling, Young men’s rites of passage groups, female support groups and student leadership class Provide mentoring support to at risk students - - - 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 57 - - - Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. AHS will leverage the needs and asset assessment, and other critically important coordinating activities by September 2018. CiS supports after school programs 2:45pm - 6:00pm. Programs include but are not limited to after school physical activities, tutoring, chess, music club, and peer mediation. AHS will use the needs and asset assessment to personalize programming and services to the needs of all students. They will do this personalizing by creating extra curricular clubs and activities for students to participate in as well as determining individual and group counseling support. AHS will utilize CiS to ensure parents and families feel welcome, attend parent-teacher conferences, and participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. AHS Principal and members of the Automotive Faculty Senate will meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools and training will be available for schools to use. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 58  The Principal will collaborate with key stakeholders (Parents, students, teachers, and support staff) to determine the proposed scope of work for the CBO. The Principal will then meet with the CBO point person (Community School Director) to refine the scope of work and include appropriate benchmarks. The Principal and CSD will discuss the possibility of subcontracting required services not within the realm of the CBO. The CBO will be introduced to the school community during the summer PD. The CBO will participate in all school-wide functions including PD. In addition, the CBO will hold a seat on the Automotive Senate. The CBO (CSD) will be a member of the PPT and will rotate through Teacher Team meetings using a schedule arrived at through collaboration of all stakeholders. Community partners will be involved in AHS by working with all Automotive High School students on Mondays from 2:30 to 4:25. The ELT program is structured with the CBO by working with Automotive administration during other professional work AHS will evaluate the program through a quarterly determination of progress toward meeting the above stated benchmarks. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program.  Community School Director funded by School Renewal Fund  Additional counseling and support staff provided by CiS  Per session for teachers to support ELT activities not supported by CiS  A dedicated room for the CiS Masters Level Social Worker for individual student counseling sessions, parent meetings, peer to peer/teacher to student mediations  A dedicated room for the CiS Youth Development Specialist for individual student counseling sessions, parent meetings, peer to peer/teacher to student mediations Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. CiS. By September 2018, the Principal will then meet with the CiS point person (Community School Director) to refine the scope of work and include appropriate benchmarks. Further, the Principal and the CSD will discuss the possibility of subcontracting required services not within the realm of the CiS. The Administrative team, teacher leaders, Guidance team, support staff, and CiS will participate in weekly and bi-weekly meetings to evaluate the progress of the RSCEP and the Community Schools program in general. By November 2018, CiS will be a standing member of the PPT and will rotate through applicable Teacher Team meetings using a schedule arrived at through collaboration of all stakeholders. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 59  Throughout the year, the CiS will participate in all school-wide functions. In addition, the CiS will hold a seat on the Automotive Senate and School Leadership Team Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 60  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Service will be provided during the school day. Service will be provided during the school day and after school. Services will be provided after the school day. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 1. Incoming ninth graders scoring between a 1 and low 2 on the 8th grade ELA assessment as well as upperclassmen that have failed a core ELA course. 2.Students that have failed one or more ELA courses. 3. Students struggling in ELA courses and/or who have failed the ELA Regents. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Students will engage in the various writing strategies that are the anchor of Writing is Strategic Inquiry (WiTSI). Students will also engage in the Rewards reading curriculum in addition to their Freshman writing class. Students will be programmed for blended learning, which will be facilitated by a certified teacher to close gap areas and support students’ completion of the coursework. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Delivery of service will take the form of whole group, small group, and one-to-one as needed. Delivery of service will take the form of small group and one-to-one as needed. Delivery of service will take the form of small group and one-to-one as needed Students will be programmed for extra help following their regularly scheduled school day on Tuesday through Friday. Students will also receive an additional class on their schedule aligned to ELA CCLS 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 61  Mathematics Incoming ninth graders scoring between a 1 and low 2 on the 8th grade Math assessment 2. Students that have failed one or more math courses. 3. Students that have failed a math course and/or corresponding Regents exam. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF standards. Students also have opportunities during the summer to make up or retake Regents Examinations. Students will engage in learning activities anchored in Metamorphosis Math strategies that are geared to bolstering students’ conceptual knowledge of mathematics. Students will engage in Imagine Math daily to support foundational math skills. Students will be programmed for blended learning, which will be facilitated by a certified teacher to close gap areas and support students’ completion of coursework. Students will be programmed for extra-help following their regularly scheduled school day on Tuesday through Friday. Students may also be scheduled for an additional class aligned to CCLS Math standards. Students also have opportunities during the summer to make up or retake Regents Examinations. Delivery of service will take the form of whole group, small group, and one-to-one as needed. Delivery will take the form of small group and one-to-one as needed. Delivery will take the form of small group and one-to-one as needed. Service will be provided during the school day. Service will be provided during the school day and after school. Service will be provided during the school day and after school. 62  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 1. Students that have failed one or more science courses. 2. Students that have failed one or more science courses and/or corresponding Regents exam Students will be programmed for blended learning, which will be facilitated by a certified teacher to close gap areas and support students’ completion of coursework. Delivery will take the form of small group or one-to-one. Service will be provided during school and after school. Delivery will take the form of small group or one-to-one Service will be provided during school and after school Students that have failed one or more science courses. 2. Students that have failed one or more science courses and/or corresponding Regents exam. Students that are: ● over-aged ● under-credited ● court involved ● in temporary housing ● gang affiliated ● identified as having drug/alcohol issues ● LGBT Students will be provided with extra help on Tuesday through Friday. Students will be programmed for blended learning, which will be facilitated by a certified teacher to close gap areas and support students’ completion of coursework. Students will be provided with extra help on Tuesday through Friday Students will receive support from Guidance Counselors, school psychologist, advisors, and CBOs. Teachers can make referrals to the appropriate support system to ensure that students receive services internally or externally, Delivery will take the form of small group or one-to-one. Delivery will take the form of small group or one-to-one. Service will be provided during school and after school. Service will be provided during school and after school. Delivery will take the form of small group and/or one-to-one. Services will be provided during and after school. 63  ●classified as Special Education 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 64  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are currently 28 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in Temporary Housing receive various supports throughout at AHS: 1) Students participate in weekly check-ins via CiS. 2) Students participate in extended learning time (1 hour per day) for additional academic support. 3) STH have unlimited access to school apparel 4) STH students have access to early breakfast and after school lunch activities. 5) STH participate in all Regents prep and Saturday academy classes. 6) STH participate in all PSAL sporting activities. 7) STH participate in CiS after school activities. 8) STH students receive counseling services upon request from student, teacher or parent. 9) STH participate in academic interventions regarding credit accumulation and regents prep. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 65  2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 66  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Automotive staff members participate in professional development twice a week during common planning time. Professional development is provided by outside consultant ten times per term for individual teacher support. All staff members participate in inter-visitations in and out of school. Our network provides multiple opportunities for staff to participate in professional development to support SWD’s, ELL’s, Common Core Learning Standards and pedagogical strategies. All new teachers are mentored throughout the year by seasoned effective veterans. We are a spotlight school for the support we do with SWD’s therefore other school visit our site for feedback on strategies. Beginning, middle and end of the year conferences with teachers around movement towards established goals. We conduct a rigorous interview process where a hiring committee comprised of Principal and staff in consultation with the Network. We use targeted professional development by Network. We also have a in-house mentoring program where senior teachers mentor new teachers. We have weekly meetings between principal and new teachers. We have incorporated beginning, middle and end-of-the-year conferences held by principal with all 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 67  teachers. There will always be travel opportunities for teachers. Administrative staff and coaches regularly attend citywide and network hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly qualified. Through the use of our website and connections to a number of teaching programs we are also able to recruit teachers from programs such as NYC Teaching Fellows, Teach for America and NYU. Strategies for recruiting staff: 1. attend job fairs facilitated by New Visions for Public Schools. 2. attend job fairs facilitated by the Department of Education. 3. collaborate with local universities to recruit graduates. 4. market vacancies by word of mouth by currently highly qualified employees Strategies for retaining staff: 1. develop teacher leaders 2. create opportunities for distributive leadership 3. celebrate successes 4. support a fully functioning teacher center 5. offer Care for the Caregiver support through CBO 6. allow staff to create clubs and activities that speak to their interests 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Staff participates in ASCD training with educators from across the world. The staff works with two common core instructional leads. The renewal schools initiative provides summer opportunities for staff to be trained in CCLS, lesson planning, WiTSI and Datawise. Automotive HS is a PARCC assessment field testing site where we take part in CCLS practice exams. Teacher participate in data driven instructional alignment to CCLS standards. Teachers have the opportunity to attend professional development and inter-visitations at network schools. As a school, we also hold in-house professional development through a number of vendors and outside contractors. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 68  Teachers receive differentiated professional development from the instructional coaches as common planning time and professional learning communities are part of the master schedule. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). ELT, targeted credit recovery provide students with the support in the specific areas they did not demonstrate mastery. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Currently, Automotive staff creates their own interim assessments based on the state and CCLS standards. All data is collected and analyzed in house. Based on results, we create professional development plans alongside the network and outside consultants. The consultants, networks and school community provide support to develop ways to improve instructions based on the data. Conversation around improvement continues throughout the semester as teams meet twice a week during common planning periods. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 69  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 276,465.00 0 0 0 2,786,119.00 Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X n/a n/a n/a Column B Section Reference(s) n/a n/a n/a X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 70   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 71  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Automotive High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Automotive High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 72  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSAState accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 73  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Automotive High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 74  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 75  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 76  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 77  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 78  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 79  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: At Automotive High School there are 22 students that are ELLs, but they are at different ENL proficiency levels in stand alone and integrated ENL classrooms separated by proficiency level. Student’s arrival in the country ranges from less than nine months, to more than 6 years, as well as born in the States. For the last four years, the ENL population at Automotive High School for 22 ELLs shows a constant need for further support and instruction in two main modalities that of writing and reading. Our annual NYSESLAT scoring indicates that the majority if not all our students show lowest proficiency levels in writing and reading modules. Furthermore, our students have consistently expressed that US/Global Regents like ELA Regents (all substantial writing-focused assessments) provide the greatest challenge and discouragement towards their final goal of graduation. Finally, our ELLs tend to pass the Algebra I Regent before any other regents especially when an ENL teacher pushes into their Algebra I class and/or attend an after school Algebra I program, both of which was done last year. Depending on the students' language acquisition and previous results of the NYSESLAT students are provided the time aligned to their outcomes by one or both of the ENL teachers. Classroom ratios are usually 1 teachers to every four students. Teachers use EngageNY and adjust the curriculum to support the varied learning styles. As a result of this data, we are to create a writing and reading program to be held once a week on Wednesdays that focuses on ELA skills and one reading and writing program to be held once a week on Fridays that focuses on historical research and writing. In addition, an Algebra I program will be held once a week on Thursdays for ENL students who have failed the Algebra I Regent and are repeating Algebra I. For both ELA writing and reading and math program on Wednesday's and Thursday's respectively will be taught by Ms. Nguyen who expects at least 2 of her transitioning ELLs to attend these classes regularly as they participated in the Title III after school program the last year with her. Ms. Nguyen will run these programs for 1.5 hours/day from 3:30 pm to 5pm. Reading skills to be practiced and mastered include: context clues and generating questions. In addition, students will have three extended writing assignments which include narrative writing, personal narrative, and Global Studies-thematic essay on genocide. Title III funds will be used to purchase readings for this class. For the Algebra classes students will be provided worksheets. They are pre-assessed at the beginning and assessed at the end of the course. Ms. Nguyen expects at least 2 transitioning ELLs to attend this class. No Title III funds will be used to purchase materials for this class. The "Exploring New York" program, that takes place on Fridays from 3:30-5:00pm, would provide language learners the opportunity to first research secondary sources then explore the same topic in the field as a practice in using primary sources. Students will practice academic language functions such as seeking information, reporting details with descriptive language, explain similarities and differences between locations, give reasons why historical detail is important, summarize research, and evaluate how or why the exploration is significant. In addition, students will get to practice using a DSLR manual camera to photograph and document their observations. Ms. Manzolillo expects to have an average of 3-4 students attend the program from all proficiency levels. The cost of materials for this class will entail the cost of 5 trips to museums, transportation, and food. Student materials will be provided and their work will be maintained in 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 80  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information folders. Attendance is taken and monitored for each session to ensure that growth occurs for all participants Parents are communicated through Kinvolved, our school based text messaging system that allows all staff to utilize various languages to support improved parental communication as well as Google and NYCDOE translated documents. The program will be open to all ELLs at the school as well as former ELLs for up to two years since passing the NYSESLAT. Therefore the after-school program will consist of writing and reading English instruction, activities, cooperative group editing and publishing of students own writing over the year. Students will be introduced to different primary and secondary texts, literature, and media literacy, which will help them shape critical thinking and writing skills so essential for the new shift in the college and career readiness. For example, they will read graphic novels, an anthropological study, a novel, and a docuseries. The after school program will encourage students to take academic risks and create cultural awareness, learn about immigrant experiences and immigrant achievements in the NYC area. This course will be setting the goal of empowering the student behind the writing and creating an affective component to what they want to publish individually or as a group. The major focus goal of our after-school program is student- writing (and reading), we will be using in class computers (about five laptops and a printer) to type some of the students work as well as to research some of the topics of their choice. We will make the most use of magazines and other important publications to make sure that most of their topics are well informed and researched. We will be partnering with student’s parents, who can contribute their own cultural experiences into the classroom and attend field trips to historical sights in New York City (possible markings, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, Transit Museum, South Street Seaport, the Empire State Building). The ESL teacher will collaborate with History, Math and Science teachers to provide further ESL support and learning strategies for teaching writing across curriculum. Our after-school program is designed to empower our ELLs and to provide a systematic support in producing writing in most authentic interactive means. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: There will be a number of professional developments that our ESL teachers will be introduced and attending in order to enrich their ESL pedagogy. Ms. Manzolillo will participate in 3 sessions of Fordham University RBERN's close reading for ELA Regent professional development. Ms. Nguyen, as ENL coordinator, will attend Brooklyn North's Advanced Literacy Training which will take place over the course of 6 sessions. These sessions will be from 8:00 to 2:30. Other professional developments will be used as an introduction for the ESL teacher to ELL topics including the regulations that govern ELL education, demographic and performance information, the ELL identification process, and ATS reports for ELLs. Each ENL teacher will attend 1-2 all-day workshops involving ELL compliance. EngageNY is also offering a ELL specific workshop to support ESL teacher in reaching ELL students. Our goal is that our ESL teacher attends at least three off site trainings at least three school inter-visitations. All teachers that receive training submit agendas to the Principal secretary who maintains a log of all professional development opportunities attended by all instructional staff. The ESL teacher 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 81  Part C: Professional Development will then turnkey information to the ELA and all other applicable departments regarding her learning. All professional development vendors are approved via the department of education with monthly professional development opportunities that can be attended based on need. Professional development will be provided by school administration and vetted Department of Education providers such as QTEL and G and R. All professional development attendance sheets are maintained in a binder located in the main office as professional developments are on going depending on teacher and student need. This is all at no cost to the program. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: At Automotive HS, there are students who residency in the U.S. ranges from less than than three years to those who were born here. In addition, 10 of our Spanish-speaking students and 1 of our non-Spanish-speaking students have parents who prefer to communicate in the home language. As such, this outreach will will revolve around topics such as to support the parents literacy, on immigration, health and first language acquisition, in order to maximize parent support at home as indicated from parents that visit our parent resource center. The ESL teachers, will continue to communicate with parents via phone, letters, Kinvolved and our website in order to ensure full parent cooperation, annual parent meeting, and participation in at least three parent literacy meetings. For over-the-phone translation services, DOE translation unit will used. Both ESL teachers will continue to keep records such as agendas, bilingual letters, and bilingual permission slips which are stored in the ESL room. The parents culminating activity would be to create a family time line that includes writing, to be presented and shared. The ESL teacher will work with the CBO at Automotive High School to bring parents in for various celebrations in sink with the ESL program and student presentations and activities. These workshops will be held in collaboration with our back to school night, monthly parent association meetings and parent teacher conferences, as well as inviting parents to attend afterschool excursions in the Exploring New York program. Parents will be notified by phone calls and permission slips sent home to the parent by the student. During the field trips, the students will act as translators. Field trips should last 2-3 hours during the 5 scheduled dates: March 1, March 15, March 29, April 5, May 3, May 10, May 17, May 24, May 31, June 7, June 14. Most workshops for parents will be delivered by industry professionals such as office of English Language Learners alongside the ESL teacher. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 82 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 12366 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 83  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 14 School Name Automotive High School Borough Brooklyn School Number 610 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Neil S. Harris Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Angelal Manzilillo Teacher/Subject Area Betty Nguyen - ESL Teacher/Subject Area Alex Kenyon - Sp. Ed. Related-Service Provider K. Brothers - SW Superintendent J. Ross Assistant Principal Tonya Adison Coach N/A School Counselor Y. Jones Parent N/A Parent Coordinator Amir Femi Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 365 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 84 Total number of ELLs 30 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.22%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Many of our ENLs have low literacy skills in both their native language and in English. A number of our ENLs are also classified as SWD. As such, their literacy levels, strengths and needs, are regularly assessed by the ENL and the Special Education Coordinator at Automotive high school using a variety of materials. The first assessment that the ENL instructional team refers to is the NYSESLAT breakdown for all students. This helps us identify which modalities students struggle with, and what kinds of activities need to be practiced regularly with the students in order to increase their skills. For example, many of our ENL students perform lower in reading comprehension and writing skills. As a result, activities that strengthen these skills are focused on, although all modalities are practiced daily in all ENL classes. In order to incorporate the use of technology, programs like Myon, Castle learning, and Starfall are used to track reading levels for all of the lower intermediate and beginner ENLs. These programs help students stay interested in reading, and help the ENL instruction team group students and further specific language skills and needs. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 85  In addition to data provided by these assessments, Automotive High School uses 9th grade ELA benchmark exams for all advanced ENL students, and a custom Benchmark exam for intermediate and Beginner ENLs. The purpose of these exams is to test the four modalities, and student’s ELA knowledge. Some of our ENLs also have IEPs that mandate alternative testing. Teachers of these students, which span content areas are required to assess these students alternatively. These ENLs receive various forms of assessment to ensure that their IEPs are being met, and that the students are demonstrating evidence of the Common Core Learning Standards in specific subject areas. The most informative assessment is the combination of the data used in the assessments discussed above combined with daily observations of students motivation, and ability in the various modalities. The ENL team ensures to create a variety of in class activities and homeworks to allow for the students to demonstrate their abilities in the four modalities. This allows for the ENL team to differentiate instruction, and educate the whole child. The ENL team aims to create an environment where students do not feel pressured or insecure, but rather comfortable to explore new and challenging activities that increase their language skills. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? ENL teachers push in to english classrooms to support beginner and lower intermediate ENL's. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The primary evaluation of our ENL program is determined on student growth within the modalities of the NYSESLAT, the ENL periodic assessment and the baseline assessments taken by ENLs in other classes. Simply stated, if students have developed their reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills in English, End of Year assessments should indicate growth when compared to baselines administered at the beginning of the school year. In addition to these assessments, Regents examination results are analyzed by the ENL team to determine how student’s fluency in English is affecting the child’s performance. The ENL and the academic advisory committee track progress of how ELL students are performing outside of the ENL classroom. Student growth on assessments coupled with academic performance are reviewed throughout the year to determine where students might require additional support. Increased student outcomes as a well as increased participation in extra-curricular activities and/or socio-emotional growth are also indicators our the success of our ENL program. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Departmental teams use the datawise protocol to create and implement interventions based on summative data. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Most of our ENLs have been in the country for several years, and despite their grade level, are intermediate or advanced according to their most recent NYSESLAT report. Currently, we have not received reports for several of our intermediate students, whom the ESL team believe have reached the advanced level. The ENL team has concluded that advanced students will be more likely to achieve proficiency by the end of the year as a result of our push-in model and our adoption of Writing is Thinking through Strategic Inquiry. Although many of our ENLs are strong in some aspects of mastering a language, such as speaking, listening and basic reading, they need to be challenged and supported more in the content area classes to help bridge the gap that is attributable, in part to, language barriers. The ENL team is continuing to create various activities with a multitude of materials and technology to enhance the learning experience for our ENLs and SWDs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? information is dissemenated during departmental inquiry meetings. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 86  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Beginner students are placed in a standalone class, taught by the ENL teacher one period per day per week. The class is ungraded. Intermediate and advanced students are programmed for a push-in model, where the ENL teacher pushes into the content area classes, highlighted by heterogenous grouping. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Automotive High School has several special education teachers, ELA teachers, a ENL teachers, and a speech specialist to ensure that student’s various needs are being met. Only Beginnere ENL students are programmed for a stand-alone period of ENL. That class meets daily for 50 minutes per day. All other students receive push-in services in the ELA classes as well as other core content areas utilizing the time allocations mandated by CR Part 154.2. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content areas are taught in English. The ENL teacher, who pushes into core content areas, collaborates with the general education teacher during common planning time at least once per week. A variety of instructional scaffolds, including but not limited to a buddy system as well as word walls and glossaries are sued to support ENL students. ENL students have access to NYS content area Regents exams (with the exception of ELA) in English and their native languages. The ESL teacher monitors students who are taking a Regents, and familiarizes them with online materials in their Native language (when available) and in English. The ESL teacher also holds after school help sessions specifically for Regents prep using these materials. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Each year, we conduct informal assessments to determine the native language levels of our ENL students. We will have students read text in their native language and explain their understanding of it. English speaking staff will review the same text in English or a native language speaking staff members will review the native language text to assess the accuracy of the students' responses. In addition, Benchmark, regents and midterm examinations are given to students in both English and In their native language to assess their abilities in content and in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? a. SIFE 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 87  b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE students are offered programs that are user-friendly and circumvent traditional classroom instruction. This includes programs such as Read 180 and MYON. Depending on the student’s ability and needs directed in the student’s IEP, activities, assessment, HW and mini lesson delivery is modified to ensure that SIFE students can perform to their greatest ability. Currently, we are focusing on interactive ways SIFE and all ELLs can increase their literacy level in a variety of genres. o questions here: For our newcomers and beginners, we focus on building literacy skills and practice in activities that strengthen skills which will be assessed on test day. Newcomers are given extra attention in the ESL classroom, and are provided supports in their content classrooms. In ESL, We use a buddy system so newcomers can work closely with more advanced students who speak the same native language. Special materials and activities are given to newcomers to build their literacy level, for example, students are given sets of Dolch site words to manipulate, practice pronouncing, and make sentences with. In Content classes, content area teachers receive teaching support from and regular check-ins by the ESL teacher about how each ELL student is progressing. Leveled texts are given to content teachers with graphic organizers, glossaries, native language dictionaries and translated versions (when possible) to help the newcomer ELLs grasp content. Automotive offers in house assessments, which newcomers participate in whenever possible. There are also regular assessments in class to track their progress. MYON and Read 180 are also used with newcomers to track their reading levels in English. For our ELLs who have been in ESL for 4-6 years, we focus on building confidence and literacy at grade level, with a secondary focus of giving high exposure to academic language vocabulary. They receive a curriculum similar to that of native speakers on their grade levels, but this curriculum is differentiated with additional supports, and lessons designed to teach decoding and analytical skills. In addition, they receive targeted grammar instruction. Long-Term ELLs receive instruction similar to that received by native speakers, with a focus on preparation for Regents exams, graduation while continuing to build confidence and literacy at grade level, high exposure to academic language vocabulary . English Regents prep is delivered to students with intermediate and advanced proficiency levels. The ESL teacher offers after school regents prep in English and Social studies, and delivers lessons to help long term ELLs become more successful on these exams. Students at this point are usually proficient in speaking but may need extra support in reading and writing. We continue to teach reading and writing strategies, while providing students with targeted and student based grammar instruction at a more advanced level. At the same time. students are completing meaningful projects to hold their interest and strengthen skills. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL teacher uses the same grade level materials, instructional and differentiation (described above) strategies for ENL-SWDs as she uses for her ENL general education students. She scaffolds and modifies the materials and strategies to ensure the mandates of each child’s IEP are met. In the event that we have an ENL whose IEP mandates bilingual instruction, we would provide ENL services with emphasis on translation when possible because, at this time, we do not have the mandated minimums for a bilingual program. (If the minimums are reached the school will create a program.) ENLs’ IEPs are made available to the ENL teacher so she is aware of the students' special needs, including their language needs 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Each student is programmed individually to ensure his or her academic needs are met. As a result, each student follows the most efficient path for him or her to graduation that meets or exceeds common core standards. Our ELL-SWD students’ programs are reviewed every six months to ensure that these students are placed in the least restrictive environment based on the mandates of their IEPs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 88  The ESL teacher regularly evaluates all ELLs’ transcripts, noting where credits are missing, and which regents still need to be passed. She also consults with content area teachers. ELLs also take class time to review their own transcripts (or for freshman, to go over graduation requirements) so they can see exactly where they need support. The ESL teacher frequently collaborates with content area teachers on class work and projects. ELL support includes translations, word walls, visuals and leveled readers. Other scaffolds include buddy systems between ELL and native English language speakers and pairing advanced students with beginner ELL students in content area classes. Content area course work is also supported during ESL class. ELL students have access to NYS content area Regents exams in English and their native languages. We offer tutoring and Regents prep after-school, during school , and on Saturdays in all content areas. These services are most often performed in English; sometimes they are offered in Spanish. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Extending the ESl program and the possibility of creating a bilingual program for Spanish speakers. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Currently, we have no programs that we will be discontinuing for ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All programs at Automotive High School are made available to all students. ELL students have access to additional supports after school via tutoring. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Dictionaries (English and bilingual), Rosetta Stone, Read 180, various materials from suppliers such as New Reader’s Press, books in native languages, books on cd and tape, and more are all used to help ELLs learn. All ESL classrooms have access to laptops and a promethean smart board, which is utilized in each lesson. Currently the ESL team is in the process of creating an interactive ESL website for all students to be able to track their assignments and progress. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? A buddy system is used, pairing advanced students with a beginner or intermediate student. Buddies speak in their native language to clarify lessons, readings, etc. They sometimes translate written materials into their native language or work together to translate written materials in their native language to English. In addition, at times students are asked to go back to their native language to explain, clarify and deepen meaning in HW and classwork assignments. Students are encouraged to pick novels in their first language during independent reading and at home. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Paste response to question here: 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Dictionaries (English and bilingual), Rosetta Stone, Read 180, various materials from suppliers such as New Reader’s Press, books in native languages, books on cd and tape, and more are all used to help ELLs learn. All ESL classrooms have access to laptops and a promethean smart board, which is utilized in each lesson. Currently the ESL team is in the process of creating an interactive ESL website for all students to be able to track their assignments and progress. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Materials and curricula are differentiated by interests, student abilities, grade levels and English proficiency. In addition, students are exposed to various levels of texts that they will see in their other classes, in order to promote understanding across content areas. During independent reading, portfolio building, and personal projects, students are provided a laptop to 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 89  research texts that interest them. In addition, leveled texts and materials are distributed to students of appropriate levels to promote comprehension and language development. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Automotjve High School currently offers a full year in Italian to all students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ELL personnel participate in weekly common planning time focused on curriculum development that includes literacy strategies and interventions for high-need students. They also regularly go on PD off-site that focuses on best practices for ELLs. ELL personnel are able to choose PD that they think is appropriate for their needs as teachers serving ELLs. The ESL teacher provides professional development about ELL compliance and instructional strategies twice a year at faculty conferences to teachers, counselors and other staff who work with ELL students. This school year, the ESL teacher will administer PD February 17th and April 21st to the entire staff. Additional dates and sessions are offered when convenient for staff members. At automotive, teachers are expected and encouraged to attend professional developments that pertain to the CCSS, their materials and their implementation. Teachers bring back this information and share during their daily common planning period. Guidance counselors receive PD through our network and from the ESL teacher about supporting ELLs as they transition. The ESL teacher meets with and consults other teachers, staff and guidance counselors to ensure we are assisting ELLs (and other students) with any difficulties they have transitioning from middle school to high school). The ESL teacher gives lessons on a variety of topics relating to transitioning to college, including applications, SAT/PSAT prep, reading a transcript, and identifying wants/needs for a college/ university. Our college office also provides teachers and students information about graduation requirements and college scholarships that cater to ELLs. Currently, the college office offers a week-long post secondary event, where families learn about a multitude of options for their children after high school. 4.Each year we search for ELL resources offered by NYCDOE and other professional development providers related to content areas and provide teachers with them. In addition, our content area teachers meet regularly during common planning time. The ESL teacher regularly checks in with content teachers of ELLs to ensure they have materials they need, or if they have any questions regarding a student's performance. The ESL teacher will provide staff PD on differentiation, helping ELLs meet the common core, and how to create/find supplemental materials in content areas for the 2013-2014 academic school year. . 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ESL teacher meets with and consults other teachers, staff and guidance counselors to ensure we are assisting ELLs (and other students) with any difficulties they have transitioning from middle school to high school). The ESL teacher gives lessons 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 90  on a variety of topics relating to transitioning to college, including applications, SAT/PSAT prep, reading a transcript, and identifying wants/needs for a college/ university. Our college office also provides teachers and students information about graduation requirements and college scholarships that cater to ELLs. Currently, the college office offers a week-long post secondary event, where families learn about a multitude of options for their children after high school.Each year we search for ELL resources offered by NYCDOE and other professional development providers related to content areas and provide teachers with them. In addition, our content area teachers meet regularly during common planning time. The ESL teacher regularly checks in with content teachers of ELLs to ensure they have materials they need, or if they have any questions regarding a student's performance. The ESL teacher will provide staff PD on differentiation, helping ELLs meet the common core, and how to create/find supplemental materials in content areas for the 2013-2014 academic school year. . Each year we search for ELL resources offered by NYCDOE and other professional development providers related to content areas and provide teachers with them. In addition, our content area teachers meet regularly during common planning time. The ESL teacher regularly checks in with content teachers of ELLs to ensure they have materials they need, or if they have any questions regarding a student's performance. The ESL teacher will provide staff PD on differentiation, helping ELLs meet the common core, and how to create/find supplemental materials in content areas for the 2013-2014 academic school year. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are invited in, at a time that is mutually agreed upon, to discuss the goals of the program, language development progress, langugage proficiency assessment results, and language development needs for all content areas. Translation, when needed, is provided by in-house personnel. External translation services are secured when necessary. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In spite of the numerous celebratory functions held at our school, ELL parent involvement is minimal. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 91 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kevin Bryant, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 92  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Neil Harris Title Principal Tonya Adison Assistant Principal Amir Femi Parent Coordinator Betty Nguyen ENL/Bilingual Teacher Y Jones Janice Ross Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/1/01 10/1/01 10/1/01 10/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/1/01 10/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 93  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 14 School Name: Automotive HS Superintendent: Ross The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Amir Femi Parent Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Oral communication preference is determined when a family contacts and/or visits our school as well as by ATS Reports and Student Emergency Contact cards. Written communication preference is determined via verbal communication with familes as well as via HLIS, ATS, and Student Emergency Contact cards. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 94  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Prefered languages are English, Spanish, Creole, and Urdu. all languages N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 90 N/A N/A N/A all languages N/A N/A N/A 10 N/A N/A N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. english, spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Handbooks - September Parent-Teacher conference announcements - September, November, March, and May After-School Program Information - August and September Calendar / monthly Testing Dates - December and May Letters from school leadership - ongoing we have bilingual staff members to translate and we send all items in english and spanish. LAC will review other languages and send out written materials based on language preference. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 95  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Freshmen Orientation - August Back-to-School Night - September PTA - monthly Parent Teacher Conferences interpretation service(s)? interpreters are present to provider interpretation services to all. n/a n/a N/A n/a N/A N/A n/a N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school strategy is to have interpreters contact families via phone an email. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. staff will be made aware of A-663 duirng schoolwide professional development. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parental notification requirements will be translated via translation and interpretation services when in-house personnel is unable to accomplish the task. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will utilize parent surveys to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 96 
