 16K627 School Name: BRIGHTER CHOICE COMMUNITY SCHOOL Principal: JEREMY DANIEL   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: BRIGHTER CHOICE COMMUNITY SCHOOL 33160010627 3-K - 5 280 HART STREET 718-453-4081 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 16K627 718-443-0639 Fax: Jeremy Daniel jdaniel6@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 16 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Jeremy Daniel JimelleFraser CieanneEverett LurieFavors N/A N/A WidnerPatrickLafontay District Information RaheshaAmon Superintendent: 1010 LAFAYETTE AVENUE ramon@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-453-4081 Phone Number: 718-453-7847 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, 11201 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 7189353954 Phone Number: 7189352382 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jeremy Daniel JimelleFraser CieanneEverette GrenelaJones WidnerLafontay Kim Nunes MelisaWise JimelleFraser *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/UFT   Name AyannaHinds-Marshall Falon Noble LurieFavors Francis Toure Lauren Harris TakeeshaWright Rae Gomes Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/Chair/parent Member/Co-Chair/parent Member/parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of Brighter Choice Community School is to create a safe and healthy learning environment that nurtures, motivates and challenges students to meet and exceed state standards. Our goal is to prepare students to succeed in middle, high school and ultimately college. We will do this by helping our students to recognize cultural differences and diversity in the classroom and the school. We will encourage our students to celebrate cultural differences. Students will build their confidence and strong personal relationships within the school.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Brighter Choice Community School is a PROSE elementary school located in the Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood of Brooklyn serving 340 children grades 3 K – 5. We are a S.T.E.A.M school which focus on science, technology, engineering, arts and math that offers both general education, special education and a dual language program in Spanish for grades Pre-K, K, 1st, 2nd, and 3rd. We believe that a dual language program will help our students to become bilingual, bi-literate and bi-cultural. At BCCS we foster thinkers who do not memorize but engage in deep learning with curiosity and passion. B.C.C,S is a school where every child has the ability to reach his/her true potential within a diverse community of learners. As each student brings his/her unique strengths and challenges, our teachers strive to teach in a variety of ways to tap into those strengths. We strongly believe in instruction that is assessment driven and require children to be actively engaged in their own education. We fully understand that “one size does not fit all.” Keeping this in mind, our philosophy and culture support a standards-based education that is challenging and focused on the individual learner. Our school believes that developing student voice through written expression is paramount. Our students engage in writing in all learning areas, including art, science, and technology. It is the belief shared by our administrators, teachers, and parents that the key to developing lifelong learners is expressing oneself through writing. We use a balanced literacy approach to teaching reading and writing. Teachers College serves as the primary curriculum for literacy instruction. At BCCS, every student takes ownership of their own learning by setting goals and creating an action plan towards mastering reading and writing skills. While direct instruction is needed for some lessons the majority of lessons are delivered with the teacher asking a series of thought provoking questions that lead students down a path of discovery and inquiry. Weekly we engage in community circle aimed at building collaboration, respect, and positive behavior among students & staff. We foster empathy and we believe that children need to understand the importance and 0  consequences of their choices. We therefore carefully guide our students to become actively involved in their social growth, teaching them to be responsible for themselves and respectful of others. We understand the importance of demonstrating, not demanding, what children need to do to become successful learners. Our academic partnerships also help to provide the social and emotional support needed for both our students in temporary housing as well as our students at large. As an arts-infused school with a cultural focus, Change for Kids is a key partner in our writing & reading goals. Through our partnership we provide a strong school experience through programs like Story Pirates, Chess and BCCS Honors. We also have a strong partnership with ExpandEd schools in bridging school curriculum with after-school enrichment. BCCS provides our students the opportunity to express themselves physically and creatively through a STEM LIT focused after school program. At BCCS our partnerships play a key role in delivering a diverse learning day. We partner with Bilingual Birdies, Ifetayo, Dwana Smallwood Performing Arts Center, Bubble, Mathletes, Studio in a School, NIA , Day One and Bubble. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. As a result of our recent merger our school community consist of roughly 30% students in temporary housing. We have built a safe and inclusive school culture to support the academic and social development of all students. We offer 12 to 1 to 1 classes, Integrated Co-teaching classes, Speech, Occupational and Physical therapy services. We have an on site full time social worker to help address the needs of our students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the past year, our school has progressed in providing a rigorous, supportive and collaborative environment. We became a PROSE school as of 2017-18 school year, bringing many teacher led committees working closely with Administration & parents. During 2016-17 school year our PTA grew in numbers and provided financial support for student enrichment & parent engagement. For this school year 2018-2019, our school will focus on continued growth in the following areas:  As a PROSE school we are altering our school schedule to extend instruction from 8am to 3:20pm Monday, Tuesday, Thursday & Friday; We are making Wednesday's a shorter day from 8am to 12:55pm.  As a PROSE school we are modifying our schedule to allow every other Wednesday a dedicated Teacher Professional Development day and the alternating Wednesdays an “Field Classroom” days where by teachers lead instruction & inquiry projects outside the classroom.  We will increase our reading proficiency.  We will continue to increase our PTA & parent engagement activities.  We will continue to grow our Dual language Spanish program expanding to Pre-K & 4th Grade.  Creating enrichment clubs to support student achievement 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 16K627 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 303 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 9 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 12 10 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 78.5% % Reduced Lunch 4.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 33.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.1 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 46.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 86% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 2 2 89.9% 5.9% 14.9% 61.1% 1.7% 0.3% 2 30% 15.4 47.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The strengths of B.C.C.S relative to this Framework element are stated below:  Students who scored a 3 and 4 on the New York State Math Assessment for 2017 went from 34.7% to 47.2% in 2018.  Based on the NYSED School Report Card in ELA proficiency in 2nd grade had a 11% gain.  Based On the 2017 - 2018 NYC School Quality Guide there is a high percentage of strong family - community ties through parental involvement, parent-principal, and parent-teacher trust. The priorities that will be addressed in the goal and action plan are to - increase student fluency and stamina increase reading complexity within informational texts    balanced literacy approach to teaching reading and writing  increase student reading levels Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 3  By June 2019, all teachers will have engaged in cycles of professional learning around assessment strategies, data analysis and cycles of observation to monitor individual students' learning, which will result in a 5% increase in students' pre and post assessment of reading proficiency. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Analyze student reading proficiency quarterly August 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, coach, grade leaders, teachers Teachers will model exemplar reading habits Curriculum team will monitor and modify reading units Teachers will implement in-class daily small-group instruction Participate in IReady Training Participate in McGraw Hill Training Participate in Professional Learning on "Classroom Assessment for Student Learning". 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers K-5, Literacy Coach October 2018 - June 2019 Teachers K-2, Literacy Coach October 2018 - June 2019 Literacy Coach, lead teachers Literacy Coach, lead teachers Teachers, Literacy Coach November 2018 - June 2019 Lead Teachers, DCC team, administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. With an active & engaged PTA we will expand our parent engagement. We will focus on supporting families to understand the importance of rigorous instruction and common core: 1. Continue our Wellness Committee & Bubble Family Engagement 2. Continue our Garden Family Engagement 3. Continue our yearly Literacy Night event 5  4. Workshops centering around parent & family support academically & socially/emotionally Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will reach our goals by having each teacher complete the self guided professional development workshops provided by CORI, creating a system of evaluating students reading 6  proficiency. Scheduling time for teams of teachers to analyze & work with students who need additional support. Comparing pre and post reading analysis of students. We will reach our goal by havi7  ng all K-2 teachers participate in a Fundations Study group. Our data indicates that some of the difficulties students faced revolved around phonics. Fundations was created as an intervention, however we use it for 8  all students to teach phonics. We continue to schedule time for teams of teachers to meet and analyze & work with students who needs additional support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 9  By February 2019, 75% of our teachers will score an Effective and above in Advance observation ratings in components 1A, 1E, 3B, 3C, and 3D. By February 2019, 80% of our students will score a 30% gain in their ELA and Math benchmark assessments as compared to their September baselines. Teachers will use their knowledge of child development, culturally relevant pedagogy, and observations of students to create a developmentally appropriate lesson plans and learning environment. The school will offer enrichment activities that support our learning goals. Our guidance counselor will create a character development curriculum and lead several workshops for students that focus on social and emotional well being. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) By June 2019, 95% of students will respond positively to an in school climate and safety survey. We are on target to meet this goal. Every Monday we have Community Circle. We use this time to address the entire student body. We discuss issues such as bullying, friendship, emotions, boundaries, communicating with peers, etc. We have also partnered with a program call Day One. We have a coach who works with students weekly to dig deep into issues that affect school climate and safety. We have an intern from Columbia university who works with students who need more small group and 1:1 support in matters that deal with school climate. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the New York ELA State Assessment for Spring 2018 we noticed a small decrease in the number of 3's and 4's from the previous school year. Increasing teacher support and resources available to them will help increase student progress. School Survey responses identified a need for additional support related to how teachers use assessment in instruction. It was discovered our teachers need improvement on how they are monitoring students learning, how they provide feedback to students and students self-assessments and monitoring progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 85% of our teachers will receive Effective and Highly Effective in how teachers use assessment in instruction on the Danielson rubric. The Advance System will be utilized to ensure that teacher's are working towards this goal. Professional Development and feedback will be provided, based upon instructional cycles which will result in increased student achievement. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Curriculum team will participate in a book study on how to improve assessment Classroom teachers; new teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal,Model teachers Model teachers will lead instructional round cycles with a problem of practice that focuses on embedding instruction Observation Cycles focused on teachers feedback Classroom teachers; new teachers September 2018-June 2019 Classroom teachers; new teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal,Model teachers Principal,Model teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In partnership with our bridging the gap social worker and our school mental health consultant we are planning a series of workshops for parents to assist them with the nuts and bolts of school. We will provide workshops on social emotional health, specific academic topics, parenting skills, volunteering, etc. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff model teachers, provide per session for grade leaders Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 70% of our teachers will score an Effective and Highly Effective in Advance observations in Danielson component 3D. By February 2019, 80% of our students will score a 30% gain in their ELA and Math benchmark assessments as compared to their September baselines. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Growth based on the Danielson framework Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a merged school we need to create a culture of trust and unity. As a result of the merger we have more than one class on each grade level. We need to create cultivate teacher leaders to improve teaching and learning in the building. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will participate in the inquiry process to impact instruction by participating on a school inquiry team and receive extensive training in Data Driven Instruction which will increase student achievement as evidenced by a increase of 6% by third and fourth graders in ELA based on the State Exam Scores as compared to 2017-18 ELA State Exam results. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Create posting for teacher leadership positions  Work with District teacher leader coordinator to create all teachers Sept/2018-June/2019 pipeline for leadership  Create schedule for model teachers to support colleagues in area of need  Create schedule that allows common planning time Model teachers, district teacher leader cooridinator, principal Book club on classroom assessment for student learning all teachers Officially staff model teachers Teachers who completed the emergent group Create calendar of workshops specifically for teacher leaders all teachers Sept/2018-June/2019 Sept/2018-June/2019 Model teachers, district teacher leader cooridinator, principal Model teachers, district teacher leader cooridinator, principal 9/2018-6/2019 Model teachers, district teacher leader cooridinator, principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. With an active & engaged PTA we will expand our parent engagement. We will focus on supporting families to understand the importance of collaborating with teachers: 1. Monthly movie nights. 2. Monthly game nights 5  3. Monthly parent workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff model teachers, provide per session for grade leaders Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 70% of our teachers will score an Effective and Highly Effective in Advance observations in Danielson component 3D. By February 2019, 80% of our students will score a 30% gain in their ELA and Math benchmark assessments as compared to their September baselines. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Growth based on the Danielson framework Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the School Quality Guide in 2017-2018, 98% of families say that the principal is strongly committed to shared decision making and 67% of teachers say that the principal participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, consistent student progress monitoring by all teachers followed by high quality corrective instruction will lead to an increase in student achievement of 10% on Math Diagnostic assessments. By June 2019, all teachers will participate in the inquiry process to impact instruction by participating on a school inquiry team with the school's administration and will receive extensive training in Data Driven Instruction which will increase student achievement as evidenced by an increase of 6% by third and fourth graders in ELA based on the State Exam Scores as compared to 2017-18 ELA State Exam results. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Participate in Teachers College leadership study group Participate in critical friends leadership group Participate in Responsive Classroom professional development training Participate in critical friends leadership group Participate in Responsive Classroom professional development training N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 6/18-6/19 Principal, critical friends, Superintendent 6/18-6/19 Principal, critical friends, Superintendent 6/18 -6/19 Principal, critical friends, Superintendent Principal, Assistant Principal, District leadership, Lead teacher, SLT Principal, Assistant Principal, District leadership, Lead teacher, SLT Principal, Assistant Principal, District leadership, Lead teacher, SLT N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Principal will host monthly "Donuts and Discourse" with the principal to discuss school vision, address concerns, and to support families. Principal and Assistant Principal will greet families during arrival and dismissal to further engage families. School social worker, bridging the gap social worker, as well as school mental health consultant will plan events that engage parents as well. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. not applicable Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Feedback from Principal Performance Review (PPR) , district leadership visits, iREADY assessments and review of interim assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Quality Review rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. While Brighter Choice Community school traditionally planned numerous family and community events, as a merged school, it is imperative that we further strengthen this area by hosting various curriculum and instructional-based workshops for families to engage in and understand the rigor presented across all content areas. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 at least 35% of our parents will attend at least 3 parent engagement activities, which will result in increased ratings supportive environment section of the learning environment survey. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Create a parent engagement committee survey parents needs Plan three family math night Plan three ELA math nights Grade team create parent engagement activities 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents, guardians 9/18-6/19 teachers, admin, parent cooridinator, PTA president, SLT chair If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Bridging the Gap Social Worker; School mental health consultant Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The SLT with support of the PTA along with community partners Bed-1  Stuy Parent Committee will plan & help pay for family workshops & school events through out the year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Create quarterly parent engagement calendar. Keep our school website updated with activities at the school. Continue to actively participate in social media and monitor parents’ engagement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. not applicable Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Scholastic Reading Assessment Mathematics Go Math assessment Science Assessment Social Studies Assessment At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Observations and referrals Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small groups of 4-6 students; Bi-weekly ELA skills in preparation of the state exam This service takes place during the school and after school. Small groups of 4-6 students Small groups of 4-6 students Small groups of 4-6 students Special interventions which include class conversations and activities This service takes place during the school and after school. This service takes place during the school and after school. This service takes place during the school and after school. This service takes place during the school day. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Modified version of Reading Recovery; guided reading-looking at print; running records observing reading behaviors; critical thinking skills to enhance familiarity with text Monthly skills in preparation of the state exam; focused strategy lessons Monthly skills in preparation of the stateexam; focused strategy lessons Monthly skills in preparation of the stateexam; focused strategylessons Meetings with students 1:1 and in group. Communicatingwith ly/teacher regarding progressand next steps 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 30% 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. After school programming, counseling, Saturday School, Enrichment club Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 30% 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  After school programming, counseling, Saturday School, Enrichment club 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. No additional funding 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. As of 2018 -19, as a PROSE school our staff will receive bi-weekly dedicated professional development on Wednesdays 8am to 12pm. We offer a wide range of Professional Development including self-selected PD. Our teacher led hiring committee interviews and moderate a trail lesson before teachers are hired. Teachers are sent to Teacher’s College Workshops. Teachers attend network wide professional development activities such as Questioning Techniques. Teachers are given feedback on going from principal. Also teachers are giving feedback to each other during learning rounds. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Principal will ensure that all teachers receive 175 hours of professional development within their 5 years of holding their professional license. Principal will hold workshops on how to apply for their professional license and complete necessary paperwork. New teachers meet weekly with grade leaders to mentor him or her. Lead teachers will provide 3 mandated hours per month on the Danielson Framework of Teaching. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 6  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The Pre-Kindergarten teachers and Kindergarten teachers meet with all parents and students who are entering Kindergarten for the upcoming school year. The parents are given a tour of the school by the Parent Coordinator, while the children are screened in literacy and math skills. The Guidance counselor contacts the pre-schools to discuss curriculum alignment and offers parent workshops to the incoming parents on the prerequisite skills needed to enter kindergarten. The Guidance Counselor and AIS Teacher, and IEP teacher meets with all incoming special education parents during registration to ensure that services will be provided from the first day of school. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We meet together beginning September Staff and principal to plan the selection of assessments for all grades. This year we also met to discuss the MOSL selections and to analyze the baseline assessments. Throughout the year our Inquiry teams discuss and monitor the progress of our students using the Teachers College Running Records and GO Math! Assessments. We are always collaborating to make sure our students are making progress. When students are not making progress we put our heads together and design individual action plans and assessments plans for these children to make sure these children move forward. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 7  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 209, 493 0 0 0 1,779,282 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5C, 5D 5A, 5B x x x x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 8  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Brighter Choice Community School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Brighter Choice Community School will support parents and families of Title I students by: 1. providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology. 2. providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 3. fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; 4. providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 5. sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 6. providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 0  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: 1. actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; 2. engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 3. ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact 4. support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; 5. maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 6. conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 7. provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 8. host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 9. schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; 10. translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; 11. conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 1  1. holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 2. hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 3. encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; 4. supporting or hosting Family Day events; 5. establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 6. encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 7. providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; 8. developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; 9. providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Brighter Choice Community School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 1. monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2. ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities and his/her age; 3. check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 4. read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 5. set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 3 6. promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; 7. encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 8. volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 9. participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 10. communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 11. respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 12. become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 13. participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 14. take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; 15. share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 1. attend school regularly and arrive on time; 2. complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 3. follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 4. show respect for myself, other people and property; 5. try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 6. always try my best to learn. 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 16 School Name Brighter Choice Community School Borough Brooklyn School Number 627 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Fabayo McIntosh-Gordon Assistant Principal Latrace Finney Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Fe Montarde Teacher/Subject Area Franchesca Castillo/ DL Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Rahesha Amon-Hamson Coach School Counselor Zahara Duncan Parent Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 298 5 Total number of ELLs 12 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.03%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): English-Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Lang. Spanish 2016-2017 Program TBE TBE TBE DL K 1 1 1 1 1 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 2 0 0 2 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Throughout the school year, Brighter Choice Community School (BCCS) uses different types of assessment from K-5. Classroom teachers from K-5th grades assess students using the following assessment tools: ELA/Math MOSL at the beginning and end of the year, the Next Step Guided Reading, a Scholastics-based Running Records, Go Math end-of-unit and end-of-year assessments. The iReady periodic benchmark assessment is used to assess the students in the testing grades 3-5 and the NYS Science for the 4th grade. These assessments encompass all the ELLs in all grades. In addition, the ENL and DL teachers use Colorin Colorado and Estrellita respectively. Teses are online resources for assessment and instruction. For beginning ELLs, the NYSITELL is used to determine the English proficiency level that will drive the teacher's language instruction. The ENL teacher also uses authentic assessment such as daily observation, teacher-created tests, performance assessment like TPR (Total Physical Response) and charade for quick assessment, visual representation, pictures, graphic organizers, checklists, rubrics and exit slips for constant monitoring. 6  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Brighter Choice Community School has the following structures in place to help teacher’s efficacy and increase student's achievement. There's monthly Grade meetings for intructional conversation and planning, PD's to support teacher's needs on instruction and differentiation, monthly instructional rounds that provide constructive feedback to classroom teachers, AIS and SETTS provide intervention services to students who are level1's and 2's. The school work in partnership with the community and parents., workshops for ELL families and After-School program. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Towards the end of the school year, in Spring, all ELLs take the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) to measure their progress and determine their level of English proficiency in all the modalities of speaking, listening, reading and writing. They also take the NY State ELA, Math and Science test that will determine their literacy, science and math performance levels. The classroom teachers use both the ELA and Math MOSL to look at where the students are at this time of the year. These assessment results overall, determine where the students are and what skill they need to improve that drives the teacher's instructional decision for the next school year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? As the school always strives towards making progress and meeting the expected annual yearly progress of ELLs, the ENL teacher makes sure that meeting the standards are behind every instructional focus. Their academic needs are addressed during the instructional June planning and Curriculum Planning during Summer Institute in August. All ELLs, including newcomers, and with learning disabilities are provided additional academic scaffolding as well as language and cultural support. Spanish dictionary in translated version, bilingual books, and other instructional material and resources are made available in Spanish. The use of guided reading and Bloom's Taxonomy's art of questioning is imperative to ensure that students will excite and develop their thinking skills. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school uses the Next Step Guided Reading, a Scholastic Running Record, to determine who are the students who need intervention in reading and the English Language Learners (ELLs) who need English and home language literacy support, including SIFE students. Not only they are supported based on their reading needs but in the number of years the ELLs received instructional support. Based on that assessment, school determines a targeted group in both lower and the upper grade ELLs from 3-5 to be in the After- School program and in the AIS group. Brighter Choice provides intensive intervention for all students including ELLs and within the RTI framework , Tier 3 students are provided with more frequent intensive intervention. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLATThe NYSESLAT exam history (RLAT) and NY State ELA and Math assessment reports inform the instruction and programming of the ENL program. They show the performace of ELLs in all modalities that drives the instruction of the classroom and ELN teachers. Instructional decisions are based on the outcome of those assessments and what areas of needs the students have. It is geared towards language development in that the classroom teachers of these ELLs have to consider different scaffolds and strategies in providing differentiated instruction based on their needs, language proficiency and performance level. It is imperative that the certified ENL teacher , the SETTS and AIS providers, and the classroom teachers have to provide direct and supplemental language instruction and vocabulary development to ELLs especially in integrated studies and Math. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? BCCS has regular scheduled teacher-team meetings to disseminate information related to ELLs. This information is discussed during Leadership Team meetings, Grade Team meetings, AIS meetings, One-on-One conference with classroom teachers and/or parents, Related Service providers and IEP meetings for ELLs-With Learning Disabilities (ELLs-WLD) . The ENL teacher 7  communicates with other service providers who service ELLs to discuss scheduling and making sure there is no time conflict. ENL teacher collaborates through articulation forms provided to classroom teachers and share information pertaining to test results and performance levels. At IEP meetings, classroom teachers, ENL teacher and service providers of ELLs-WLD, plan and discuss instructional strategies that geared towards meeting their needs. There are also workshops and PD's for families of ELLs, of which we share information to ELL families; provide resources that will help the parents support their children succeed in school. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ENL program at Brighter Choice Community School (BCCS) uses both Pull-out and Push-in model. The ELLs are picked-up from classroom and provided differentiated ENL instruction according to grade and English proficiency level. The grouping is based on grade and proficiency levels, i.e. students in Kindergarten [Entering(E) and Emerging(EM)] together, Grades one and two (E/EM); Grades three and four (E/EM), and/or Grade 4/5 (E/EM. Transitioning and Expanding ELLs are also grouped by Grade level and English proficiency level. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Students in the Dual Language program are in homogeneous groups during independent work and small group time according to their reading levels. At times, they are in heterogeneous grouping. Phonics instruction is done in both English and Spanish depending on the schedule (English day or Spanish day). Spanish level is the same for all. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Scheduling is very crucial. It has to be done in collaboration with other ELL service providers.The ENL teacher collaborates with these service providers such as Speech teacher, OT/PT, AIS teacher, guidance & counseling provider, and SETSS to make sure that schedule is arranged to avoid conflict with ENL class. This is done to ensure that mandated number of minutes per week, are provided. Entering and Emerging ELLs are provided 2 units of study per week (360 minutes) of ENL instruction and 1 unit of study per week (180 minutes) ENL instruction for Transitioning and Expanding English Language Learners (ELLs). Those ELLs who exited out of NYSESLAT are still included in the schedule of services provided as they will continue to be provided with 90 minutes/week of ENL instruction for two years even if they achieve commanding level of proficiency. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. he school’s ENL and Dual language program are designed to develop both the social and academic development of ELLs. Basic interpersonal communication and English language skills of ELLs are developed through Cooperative Learning approach either in pair and/or small group. During push-in, the ENL teacher sits and work with the group of ELLs to reinforce the lesson using ENL methodologies. Since the school uses the iReady across the grades, the ENL teacher works in collaboration with the classroom teachers of ELLs through conversations and meetings to assist the students in reading, writing and language development. The ENL teacher uses Thematic Units in delivering the content area instruction in Science and Social Studies 8  based on the content units in the iReady curriculum. ENL teacher provides articulation forms/congruence sheets to classroom teachers to reinforce and align language, literacy and Math instruction that fosters academic language development and to help students meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher delivers 100% English in providing differentiated instruction using TPR, hands-on activities and Language Experience Approach- i.e. exposing them to speaking and likening activities during the read-alouds, playing & discussing books on tapes, phonics, and language patterns. The ENL teacher uses sheltered instruction- i.e. using English language instruction in teaching the content area topics more comprehensible to students with limited vocabularies. This includes using visuals, demonstrations and collaborative learning activities for the ELLs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Knowing that a child speaks a language other than English based on the HLIS form, he will be appropriately evaluated in thenative language. Newly admitted ELLs who speak Spanish are tested with New York State Identification Test for English Language learners (NYSITELL) and Spanish LAB. Those ELLs in the testing grades who are in the system for a year and will take the state wide tests are provided with test materials in their native language in Math, Science and Social Studies tests. The school sets aside funds to pay for an eligible bilingual-Spanish/Urdu individual who does the translation if necessary, in their native language or to order/purchase materials that are in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The ENL teacher will follow the screening procedures stipulated in Appendix A of the BESIS for SIFE students. If a student is categorized as SIFE, those with a home language of Spanish will take the Academic Language & Literacy Diagnostic (ALLD) test for placement. The school will provide a very supportive environment that responds to the immediate social, cultural and linguistic needs of these students.English Language Learners who are newcomers will be provided with 2 units of study per week. They will receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction until they develop English language proficiency. English language learners can achieve at proficient levels within full- immersion model, or a classroom where only English is spoken within the school and home. The ENL teacher designs lessons that develop both their social and academic language through thematic units. Instructional materials and method are prepared to help ELLs accelerate language acquisition and develop academic skills necessary for the academic challenge ahead. The ELLs in Grades 3-5 will take the state wide test in ELA only after one year of enrollment in the NY City public school system. They need the academic language to perform and meet the Common Core State Standards. Therefore the ENL teacher has to prepare them to get ready for these tests in ELA and Math; teach them the academic vocabulary and language of the test; help them develop higher- order thinking skill through higher level questionings. They are also taught how to use the bilingual dictionary (word-to- word translation) that they could use during the content tests. At this time, BCCS does not have long term ELLs. However, if we acquire these ELLs in the future, we will pull out these kids in small group for differentiated ENL instruction. They will be referred for intensive Academic Intervention Services (AIS) where they will receive intensive literacy and language instruction. The ENL teacher will provide explicit instruction in the five components of reading – phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary and comprehension. The ENL teacher informs the administration about the former ELLs and make sure that these ELLs who tested out of NYSESLAT will continue receiving additional academic support outside the classroom (e.g. AIS and other small group instruction other than ENL) while they continue to transition themselves into the regular mainstream class. Formers ELLs who are in Commanding levels will continue to be serviced and receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction per week for two years after they test out of NYSESLAT. If these students are in Grades 3-5, they will continue to receive testing accommodations (i.e. separate location and extended time and a half) for two (2) years after they test out of NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 9  Classroom Instruction always adheres to the Common Core Learning Standards for writing, reading, informational text, reading literature andlanguage. The ENL teacher employs scaffolding strategies that unpack the academic language found in informational reading and content area learning. To enhance ELL's Math skills, the ENL teacher brings the language of Math that they encounter during their daily math lessons. ELLs –WLDs are provided focused instruction in phonics and small group guided reading and writing. School provides academic intervention services (SETSS) to these students and providers do co-teaching. Teachers provide more language drills in oral and written forms, listening activities and test preps. The school uses the iReady curriculum for ELA- literacy and Go Math. Both of these are Common Core aligned programs that will help all the students access academic contents andaccelerate academic language development. In addition, the ENL teacher collaborates with the classroom teacher of these ELLs-WLDs in planning a CCLS based- instruction that addresses language development. ENL lessons are aligned to Social Studies Project-Based curriculum and Go Math, provide scaffolds as students perform the tasks across content area. Teachers ensure to model for students during instructional conversations that involve higher order questionning so that students themselves will learn to initiate academic discourse among themselves. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Brighter Choice Community Community School sets schedules for grade meetings to design lessons that address the needs of ELLs –WLDs. They are provided focused instruction in phonics and small group guided reading and writing. Aside from the services stipulated in the IEP, the school IEP teacher provides SETSS to these students. Language drills in oral or written forms, listening activities and test preps are also provided. During the literacy iReady curriculum block, the IEP teacher performs small group instruction with designated ELLs-WLDs and the lowest one-third of the school population while the classroom teacher provides instruction with the regular class. In addition to the 360 or 180 mandated number of minutes provided by the ENL teacher, he SETSS provider provides 60 minute academic instruction twice a week. The program targets these identified ELLs-WLDs and provided instruction in the ICT class according to their IEP. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In addition to literacy and content area instruction received in the classroom, the school increases Academic Intervention Services (AIS) for students, including ELLs, whose performance is below grade levels. There is no targeted intervention program for ELL subgroup alone but there is a targeted intervention program for at-risk students, i.e. students including ELLs who are at the bottom 1/3 and those scored level 1's and 2's. This is for both ELA and Math. In Math, the ELLs use Spanish workbooks to better understand mathematical concepts being taught. All students, except those who have opted out, attend the After-School Program. This program offers both academic and social support to students from K-5, four times a week from 3:00 to 5:00, Monday through Thursday. Professional Development is given to teachers who are providing intervention to children with limited English proficiency and at-risk students. Additional ELA and Math periods are provided to 5th graders including ELLs who scored level 1's and 2's during the day. ELLs who have speech difficulty are serviced by the Speech Teacher. Saturday Academy is set every year for these students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? As of this time, the school has not identified any new programs to be implemented yet but will continue to use the Go Math and iReady programs for instruction. Literacy instruction in lower grades uses Wonders in reading and Teacher's College Units of Study in writing. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The didn't have a Bilingual Program 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs have access to all school programs including After School Program. These ELLs are offered the same quality academic instruction that native English speakers received in the classroom. This is because the ENL teacher aligns ENL instruction with the Common Core Standards in ELA, Math and content area subjects. ELLs participate with the Ifetayo Dance, Art Studio, 0  Brighter Minds, etc. Both curricular and extracurricular activities are always school wide. Therefore, ELLs are afforded the same access and privilege to programs, i.e. small group instruction, AIS, and SETSS, that other students receive. The After School Program is for all students except Pre-K. It starts from 2:20 to 6:00 p.m. If parents signed up for that after school program, students would benefit from both the academic and social services provided by the school staff. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL teacher chooses thematic units to teach the lessons in Science and Social Studies which are also based on the curriculum and content topics that the classroom teachers use in the classroom. Each classroom is equipped with SmartBoards and document readers, and laptops for all students including ELLs. Additional teacher resourses and/or reference materials include Readworks.org., Scotts Foresman, ENL Sunshine Edition and Into English (i.e. with books on tapes, chosen posters and workbooks) that are used to support content-area instruction. The Into English program are designed by grade and proficiency levels which uses books on tapes, posters, workbooks and picture cards. These are language-rich materials with picture supports to make the content and language comprehensible. In Math, the ENL teacher uses different reference books and workbooks of Go Math, Kaplan & Ladders to Success. Many times, the ENL teacher uses the Internet, Engage New York, to print Math learning activities to reinforce the lesson covered during the day. Math workbooks in Spanish are provided to ELLs in the testing grades; English-Spanish dictionaries and bilingual glossaries are used to help them find meaning of some unfamiliar vocabularies that are discussed and they've read in the text in either Science or Social Studies. These materials are used to plan and design rigorous lessons aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards to meet the students' needs and expectations. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The ENL Program provides a nurturing environment to all ELLs to meet their needs. Home language is assessed with the Spanish LAB (Language Assessment Battery) at the beginning of the year to determine home language proficiebcy and identify the language needs for instruction. The ENL teacher ensures that the classroom has names of things labeled in English and Spanish. The ELLs are allowed to use their native language with the teachers and peers in both academic and social setting so they could express themselves in their transition to developing English proficiency. Newcomers are supported through class buddies who are proficient in both English and Spanish. ENL classroom has a bilingual library. ELLs are encouraged to borrow bilingual books to take home to read with the parents. They could access to bilingual dictionary, bilingual books and instructional charts to read and use while they are in the the ENL classroom. Letters and communication sent homes like newsletters, school calendars, etc. are in Spanish translated version. In the Dual Language program, home language is formally and informally assessed through phonics and Math instruction. They are also assessed using the Estrellita program. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL teacher and all service providers (i.e. AIS, SETSS, Spech, OT) follow the mandated services according to the ELL's academic, linguistic and socio-emotional needs, grade, and language proficiency level. Therefore, the services they receive are age and grade appropriate. All ELLs from Kindergarten to 5th grades are grouped by age and grade and serviced according to their proficiency level and mandated number of minutes required under the revised CR Part 154. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The ENL teacher of BCCS talks with the ENL teacher of a district 75 school, P.S. 140 when she comes to the building. They share and discuss new policy and updates related to ELLs,; share handouts and resources gathered during P’s and ELL strategies that will enable them to support the needs of ELLs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Every year, the school holds a "Back to School" kick off activity, a week before the academic school year begins. The administration and staff welcome the students and families to the school. Parents, staff and students talk about the upcoming activities for the school year with music and food served. Teachers who speak Spanish were assigned to assist the Spanish 1  speaking families during the activity. On the first day of school, all new incoming students including ELLs are gathered in the school yard. All teachers and staff assist in the transition of the first day. Each classroom teacher has a designated spot with the name of the class on a placard, while all out of classroom teachers assist the parents in finding what class the child belongs. Both the ENL and Dual Language teachers who have beginning ELLs communicate with parents on an on-going basis for support. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time, there is no language electives offered to ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? The Dual Language program at BCCS uses self-contained model with A/B alternate schedule. It is a full 2-day/3-day instruction in two week cycle. It uses 50-50 language of instruction, i.e. 50% English and 50% Spanish . All curriculum subjects are taught in both languages. The classroom is separated by language color codes, i.e. Blue indicates English and Red indicates Spanish. The classroom includes a library, word wall and classroom labels that are in both languages. Literacy is taught simultaneously in that each day, literacy is taught in the language of the day in that each day, literacy is taught in the language of the day. he name of the class on a placard, while all out of classroom teachers assist the parents in finding what class the child belongs. Both the ENL and Dual Language teachers who have beginning ELLs communicate with parents on an on-going basis for support. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All classroom teachers attend both in-house and outside of the building staff development workshops throughout the school year. They attend PD's on instructional strategies that help them support ELLs. The ENL teacher who is a member of the ELL Coordinators Working Group and SOLE ENL Provider's Group meet quite few times in a year to discuss nuts and bolts of ENL program, and other ELL compliance reports. These meetings discuss about protocols to follow for the school to be in compliance. Tachers also learn and discuss new ELL updates and research-based strategies to help the ELLs improve proficiencly level. The ENL teacher also attends series of professional learning opportunities sponsored for ENL teachers from the Brooklyn North Field Support Center, PDs from the Office of ELLs and/or from the Department of English Language Learners for Student Support (DELLSS) to learn new innovative ways and research-based instructional strategies that are useful in providing ELLs with rigorous instruction to meet the Common Core Learning Standards. The Dual Language teachers also receive trainings on DL programs and attend PD's and meetings for Brooklyn North Launching a Bilingual Classroom Study group. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2  To meet the required professional development of teachers as per CR Part 154.1 and 154.2 adopted regulation, school provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English Language Learners.Teachers are given the opportunity to attend PDs provided by the Brooklyn North Field Support Center and from the Office of English Language Learners. BCCS also provide school-based PDs that address the Common Core Standards & Danielson's Framework, data-driven instruction and best practices. The school ensures that 15% of PD hours are provided to classroom teachers and 50% for Bilingual Education and ENL teachers receive PD hours that are specific to the needs of ELLs, co-teaching strategies, and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. To further enhance effective instruction, the DL and ENL teachers share with classroom teachers various ENL instructional and scaffolding strategies that they've learned in their PDs. This will give the classroom teachers the support they need in teaching ELLs in terms of differentiated activities appropriate to the proficiency level of the ELLs in their classroom. Teacher's records of agendas and attendance to the PDs are filed and kept in the school PD binder for record keeping. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Brighter Choice Community School welcomes all parents and values their input as a partner in building a learning community. Mandated ELL parent orientation meetings and DOE scheduled parent-teacher conferences are avenues where school communicates to these parents about the needs and progress of all students including ELLs. Aside from that, the school administrators, the Parent Coordinator and ENL teacher reach out to parents of ELLs through phone calls and one-on-one conversations, may it be formal or informal. Usually, the parent coordinator, together with a parent or teacher, does home visitations and most of the time calls on parents to follow-up whatever child or school related information they needed to know. The school provides PD to ELL parents specific to their needs to help them better assist their children at home. They are also given a list of online resources that will help supplement English development. They could access these resources at home if they have internet. Meetings may be called if needed, letters and/or notices may be sent home. Open-School Nights and Student-led Conference get these parents involved in their child's academic development and success. All parents are informed of their children’s academic progress through monthly progress reports, notices, monthly school calendar and class newsletters. These correspondence are translated in the parent's preferred language. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. PS 627’s goal is not only to accommodate the students but also the parents. The schoool parent coordinator and PTA regularly meet and discuss parents’ concern within the school community and plan activities that involve parents' active participation. Since parental involvement enhances student’s performance, the school ensures that ELL parents participate in all school activities. These activities include Curriculum Night, Open-School Night, Family Basketball during Father’s Day, Mother’s Day Breakfast, Families as Learning Partners, Ifetayo Dance, Brighter Minds assembly and during the celebration of Hispanic Heritage Month. During these celebrations or activities, families are invited and sent letters in their preferred language. This is done to foster closer relationship with all parents including parents of ELLs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 3  4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Fabayo Mcintosh-Gordon, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Brighter Choice Community School School DBN: 16K627 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Fabayo McIntosh-Gordon Principal Latrace Finney Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Fe Montarde /ENL ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Franchesca Castillo Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Zahara Duncan School Counselor Rahesha Amon-Hamson Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Alisa Mooklall Other Other Other 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 7  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 8  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 9 
