 17K646 School Name: ASPIRATIONS DIPLOMA PLUS HIGH SCHOOL Principal: SHERMA FLEMING   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Section 1: School Information Page School Information Aspirations Diploma Plus HS 17K646 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 332300011646 9-12 402 Eastern Parkway 718-773-7765 School Number (DBN): 718-773-4879 Fax: Sherma Fleming Sflemin22@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Sherma Fleming Jeremy Taffel Stephanie Linton MattheeOwens Natasha McClean SamoneTerry Josiah Hill/Intelligent Johnson (Alternate) Andrew Dillon District Information City-Wide Districts Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: Paul Rotondo Superintendent: 198 Forsyth Street-3rd Floor, New York, NY 10002 PRotond@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (646) 654-1261 Phone Number: (646) 654-1742 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn South MauricieredeGovia FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 415 89th Street, Brooklyn, New York 11209 mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 759-3952 Phone Number: 718-759-3909 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Sherma Fleming Jeremy Taffel Stephanie Linton StephenetteWright Natasha McClean SamoneTerry Josiah Hill/Intelligent Johnson Andrew Dillon Matthew Owens Golden Julien Wayne Anderson *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Director Member/ UFT Teacher Member/UFT Teacher Member/ CSARepresentative   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is “D.R..E.A.M. - Driven to Reach Every Academic Milestone” that fosters a learning environment that empowers our students to move to the next phase in their lives. In order to ensure fidelity to our mission, we have partnered with Medgar Evers College Liberty Partnership Program (LPP), Creative Outlet, G.I.A.N.T. Thinking (Growing is a Noble Thing), Child Center of New York (CCNY) and the MIC Clinic to meet the needs of our students and staff. The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement. To that end the administration staff at Aspirations Diploma Plus High School provides structured professional development on a weekly bi-weekly basis for all teachers. This is facilitated by   the administration team and receive support from educational consultant specialist Ms. Morgan Hildesley from Redesign . Our key areas of focus is preparing a comprehensive lesson planning, student writing across curriculum, questioning and discussion in the classroom, and student assessment. The Achieve Now program through Office of Youth Development brought in to develop a collaborative Extended Learning Time (ELT) program for our students and families and TMI to enhance areas of strength and develop areas for growth of our teachers as identified in Advance. The MIC Clinic is our primary mental and physical health partner. We are working with our partners to build a strong ELT culture that will serve to keep students motivated and focused on the goal of successfully completing their course work and moving on to the world of college and or careers. As per our 2016-2017 Quality Review, Findings The school leader communicates high expectation for teachers, students, and families through frequent observations and the modeling of effective practices. In addition, the school leaders provide targeted support to students, and conduct frequent family outreach. Impact The school leader’s expectations, along with the supports provided to reach these expectations are helping to improve student outcomes and preparing students for college and career. Supporting Evidence  The principal begins the school year by reviewing the school's expectations, Framework for Great Schools and the Danielson Framework. These expectations are embedded in planning documents across subjects. Teachers receive instructional support from Teaching Matter and school leaders that are captured in ongoing written feedback. Moreover, the assistant principals model lessons to share best practices with teachers and models expected instructional strategies  For the upcoming 2018-2019 school year, the school will have collaborated with Child Center New York to hire an additional college advisor and advocate counselor to work with students and families to support them with the college process. Students are afforded the opportunity to go on college trips so that they are able to make transitional plans for the future. Parents stated that the school conducts college trips and offers other incentives to reengage students, as well as additional academic supports through the after school. They stated that these supports are helping students to get back on track to prepare for them for college. A parent stated, “They make my children feel that they will and can succeed.” The school currently offers a college and career after school program in collaboration with the learning to work coordinator. Teachers described that the school’s emphasis in writing, note taking, and exposing students to high level text such as Shakespeare is helping to better prepare students for college.  The school consistently communicates with parents to provide academic updates and involve them with the students’ academic progress and school related activities. The Parent Coordinator send home monthly newsletters and flyers informing parents of upcoming events, workshops, and student achievements. Additionally, the school utilizes Skedula so that parents and students can access academic data daily and keep track of students’ academic progress. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 0  Every student at Aspirations has had a struggle and transferred here either after being previously incarcerated, dropped out of school, having had a baby, suffered with substance abuse, foster care, living in shelters or just has not experienced success in their previous school. Aspirations Diploma Plus High School is their last opportunity to graduate with their high school diploma . Many of our students don’t have a vision for a future beyond graduating high school as they are the first generation to graduate. They come to us hungry, some need clothes, some need child care and all need social emotional advocacy and counseling on a regular basis to stay motivated to finish and earn their diploma. Working with our partners Medgar Evers College Liberty Partnership Program and CCNY, we expect to continue to make positive gains in these focus areas. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Aspirations Diploma Plus is a transfer high school with 220 students from grade 9 through grade 12. Our students represent a population that has been under-served by the school system. The school population comprises 74% Black, 20% Hispanic, 3% American Indian or Alaskan, 1% White, and 2% Asian students. The student body includes 4% English Language Learners and 13% Special Education students. Boys account for 48% of the students enrolled and girls account for 52%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2015-2016 was 63.6%. Our students are over-aged and under credited, on average a student that comes to our school is 18 years old with 10 credits or less. 87.1% of our students are Title 1 eligible for free lunch. They are young people who need significant remediation in basic reading and math skills as well as study skills. Their reading and math scores are 5-6 years lower than their peers, and most are level 1s and 2s. In ELA level 1s are 11.76% and level 2s make up 71.57% of our population. In math, 16.8% are level 1s and 55.39% are level 2s. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We have made significant progress in the areas of Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, Effective School Leadership and Strong Family-Community Ties as evidenced by our 2016-2017 Quality Review Feedback, January 2016 and January 2017 Regents data and credit accumulation data in STARS. Performance Trends: Increased Regents Pass Rates MOST PROGRESS: We have seen an increase in Regents pass from January 2016 to January 2017 in 4 of the Regents exams that students have taken. We saw an increase in ELA, US history and Algebra Common Core. In addition, we saw an increase in Living Environment as per the above chart representing data pulled from ATS. English Language Arts (ELA) increased by 22%, Algebra increased by 24%, Living Environment decreased by 7% and US History increased by 31%. In addition to the increase in passing percentages, there was also an increase in the number of students sitting for the exams. In January 2016, 194 students were tested. In 2017, the number tested increased to 218, an overall increase of 24 students. January, 2016 Regents Pass Rates January, 2017 Regents Pass Rates Subject Students who Took Test Students who Passed Test Percentage who Passed Subject ELA CC Students who Took Test 24 Students who Passed Test 19 Percentage who Passed 82% 1  ELA Comp. ELA CC Algebra CC Global History LE US History 45 2 4 54 55 38 19 1 0 11 60% 50% 0% 16% 15 (8-Sped. Ed) 31.25% 5 13% Algebra CC Global History LE US History 49 59 36 50 10 + 4 (Sped. Ed) 15 13 33 24% 26% 23% 66% Longitudinal Analysis of Regents Exam Pass Rates ATS REDS Reports SUBJECTS Living Environment Comprehensive English Common Core began 205-2016 US History Integrated Algebra/ Algebra Common Core began 2015-2016 Global History AREA OF FOCUS REGENTS PASS RATES 2013-2014 2014-2015 2015-2016 2016-2017 44% 31% 40% 52% 59% 50% 43% 48% 27% 37% 50%+ 24% 31% in Algebra CC 25% Our areas of focus for the 2018-2019 school year will be to continue to build our Extended Learning program particularly around Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers and Strong Family-Community Ties. We have begun to see the positive shifts such as increase in attendance, greater credit accumulation and higher Regents pass rates. Patterns of students attendance in Transfer Schools New York City has 52 transfer schools. These schools were created to meet the needs of a population that is over aged and under credited. Attendance is an issue most transfer school students struggle with. As per data from the DOE that was reviewed on 10/30/2014 at a Transfer school Principal's meeting, it was noted that very early in this school year, attendance was already low and that it was approaching where transfer school’s ended the year. Last year, the average for all transfer high school attendance was 68.1% across New York City. Data Patterns for attendance at Aspirations We have noted our attendance based on the weekly and yearly report from the DOE for this progress report period fluctuates bi-monthly. We attribute this positive change to the intense scrutiny we have been giving this issue and our rewards system that is constantly changing has motivated them to come to school even with the incredibly bad winter we have had. Our students love basketball so we are capitalizing on our location of Brooklyn and the Nets together with March Madness to keep them coming to school. We continued to provide food and gift certificates as part of our incentive program. In addition, we have also created incentives that are linked to specific after school programs and our continual push to involve families in a positive direction with their kid’s education. We continue to note that a 2  significant number students struggle with daily and on time attendance. Many are late and miss their first period class. There is chronic absenteeism with a group of older students. We are working with our attendance teacher and guidance staff to help them find a YABC or to discharge them from our roster. We have also just enrolled 25 new students who began on March 23, 2017. As a trimester transfer school, we have rolling enrollment because of the transient nature of our population we have to constantly monitor attendance and enrollment. We also graduate students multiple times in the year which also impacts our enrollment. Therefore, for the 2017-2018 school year, we have shifted our programming where the core content courses will take place later in the morning beginning at 3rd period. 2015-2016 2016-2017 change January 59.89 February 61.51 March 65.72 62.60 67.37 +1.65% Strategy adjustments/ specific school actions We continue to note that a significant number students struggle with daily and on time attendance. Many are late and miss their first period class. There is chronic absenteeism with a group of older students. We are working with our attendance teacher and guidance staff to help them find a YABC that may meet their needs to attend school later in the day.. We have also increase the number of home visits conducted from 68 for this time period last year to 128 this year. We plan to continue to aggressively tackle this issue of absenteeism by making more home visits and having one on one meeting with families around their child’s data. Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have designed rigorous instruction on paper with Understanding by Design unit maps that are aligned to Common Core LS and New York State Standards, however the implementation of these units are a developing area, particularly the pieces on on-going formative and summative assessments. Assessment and creating a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments and tracking them is an area for growth. While some teachers are engaging in this process, it is not a consistent cohesive practice as per our 2014-2015 Quality Review. Quality Indicator:2.2 Assessment Rating: Developing 3  Findings The school is developing in their use of common assessments to measure student progress. Teachers use rubrics aligned to the school curricula to provide students with actionable feedback. Rubrics are used in many classes with a variety of assignments. However, students are limited in their ability to explain the role rubrics play in providing feedback to advance their achievement. Students shared several assignments with feedback and explained the teacher includes areas for improvement to submit for an increased grade. They are provided opportunities to improve their work during extra-help sessions during and after school. Evidence of alignment of the written feedback and the rubric ratings which students use to make revisions is not apparent. Most students explained that the teacher usually provides immediate verbal one-on-one support that more explicitly defines the adjustments regarding areas to improve upon. Impact Current assessment practices, particularly formative and summative practices are not yet fully aligned; thus limiting student growth on summative assessments. Supporting Evidence STRENGTH : The school leader shared that teachers align assessments with content curricula and utilize a common grading policy and rubrics to provide consistent feedback to students. The use of a common grading policy and rubrics were evident across the school community. Student work with teacher feedback was posted throughout the school community. NEED: Teachers were observed checking for understanding through conferencing, asking questions, and canvassing the classroom. In one out of the seven classrooms visited, a teacher was charting student progress. However, these practices were inconsistent across classrooms and teachers were not observed making instructional adjustments based on in-classroom assessment of student performance. For instance, during a math lesson, students appear to struggle with the questions and mathematical concepts being reviewed, but the teacher continued the lesson with minimal intervention. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Rigorous Instruction By June, 2019, as a result of increased student cognitive engagement and student-led classroom discussion, there will be a 4% increase in credit accumulation across all grades as measured by scholarship reports. Teachers will participate in bi-weekly Professional Development with the administration team and an the educational consultant from Redesign. The focus remains Domain 3 of the Danielson Framework, which will be measured by monthly administrative observations and weekly walk-throughs through the lens of the Danielson Framework rubric. More importantly, we will have the support of our Peer Collaborative teacher, AP for All coach and the Transfer School Institute to support our instructional focus and our teachers. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers and administrators will meet to develop focused professional development plan based on student needs. All teachers Teachers will engage in Common Planning Time 3x weekly in order to develop and refine curriculum. A Sept. 2018-December 2018 and January 2019-June 2019 Redesign consultant Principal and Assistant Principals, teachers, Creative School Solutions Teachers will engage in Understanding By Design Unit planning using EngageNY modules Teachers will be trained in how to develop cognitively engaging lessons that employ higher level questions and how to plan for student-led discussions. In addition, we have implemented case conferencing with the entire school community where students academic and social needs are discussed on a bi-weekly basis. Teachers will engage in data analysis in order to determine curricular needs for ENLs, Students with Disabilities, and students in the lowest third. Teachers will adjust/modify curriculum maps and lesson plans in order to address student needs determined through data analysis All teachers Sept. 2018-Dec. 2018 and January 2019-June 2019 Redesign consultant Principal and Assistant Principal and teacher leaders Teachers will use Collaborative time to share best planning practices specific to our population of Ells, students with disabilities, overage/under credited and other subgroups All teachers Administrators will review unit and lesson plans to insure alignment to the goal Teachers will review scholarship reports and report cards after every marking period in order to determine how to meet needs of students still not passing classes. All Teachers, students and families Teachers and administrators will engage parents through meetings and Skedula, a communication program, in order to inform them of student needs, progress and supports given. Sept. 2018-Dec. 2018 and January 2019-June 2019 Redesign, Principal and Assistant Principal and teacher leaders All Teachers, students September 2018-December 2018 and January 2019-June 2019 5  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be provided the information during the various parent-teacher conferences, parent association meetings, teacher outreach and other information sent to the home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Educational Consultant meets with teachers for professional development for 80 minute PD time on Tuesdays (Administration, Superintendent's office and Redesign) ● 37 ½ minutes SBO ● Achieve Now Program -working with students on academic skills in the classroom after school. ● Administrators work individual content areas throughout the year to ensure academic success (Each department will have content meetings as well as common planning time) ● Administration will meet weekly for walk-throughs and observations ● English and Mathematics will use the Core Curriculum in their classrooms Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2018, there will be a 2% increase in credit accumulation as measured by scholarship reports. In addition, data reports will be extracted from STARS and Skedula to monitor student's progress, teachers scholarship reports and credit accumulation tracker to ensure the school's progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Or mid-point progress will be in the form of looking at Scholarship reports, student's progress reports, regents scores, performance assessments and student work. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Students will continue to use the instructional focus which states "That all students at all levels will develop the skills of using evidence from various text sources to support arguments in discussion and writing across all content areas. Students will continue to work on textual evidence in order to support their positions. The students will also use the DOK to make them aware of the different levels of questions to be utilized in the content areas. STRENGTH The school leader communicates high expectation for teachers, students, and families through frequent observations and the modeling of effective practices. In addition, the school leaders provide targeted support to students, and conduct frequent family outreach. Impact The school leader’s expectations, along with the supports provided to reach these expectations are helping to improve student outcomes and preparing students for college and career. Supporting Evidence  The principal began the school year by reviewing the Framework for Great Schools and Danielson Framework. These expectations are embedded in planning documents across subjects. Teachers receive instructional support from Creative Schools Solutions prior to the start of the school year to address the inconsistency of lesson planning and instructional practices across all content areas. In addition, both Teaching Matters and school leaders that is captured in ongoing written feedback. Moreover, the assistant principals model lessons to share best practices with teachers and model expected instructional strategies.  The school college adviser works with students and families to support them with the college process. Students are afforded the opportunity to go on college trips so that they are able to make transitional plans for the future. Parents stated that the school conducts college trips and offers other incentives to reengage students, as well as additional academic supports through the after school and Saturday programs. They stated that these supports are helping students to get back on track to prepare for them for college. A parent stated, “They make my children feel that they will and can succeed.” The school currently offers a college and career after school program in collaboration with the learning to work coordinator. Additionally, they utilize the Road Trip Nation as part of the advisory curriculum. 7  Teachers described that the school’s emphasis in writing, note taking, and exposing students to high level text such as Shakespeare is helping to better prepare students for college.  The school consistently communicates with parents to provide academic updates and involve them with the students’ academic progress and school related activities. The Parent Coordinator sends home monthly newsletters informing parents of upcoming events, workshops, and student achievements. Additionally, the school utilizes skedula Grades so that parents and students can access academic data daily and keep track of students’ academic progress. Needs: We have begun to develop a system to support the social-emotional needs of our students. We have acquired an additional guidance counselor and a social worker to balance our community to support students who experience tremendous hardships in the classroom and at home. The students meet with the social worker one to two times a week. The Community Based Organization has hired two additional Youth Counselor to service students on a regularly basis. This increases the number of Youth Counselors to five instead of three. Also, we have four College Graduate Social Worker Interns who support students who are identified at high stress levels due to external factors. The students meet with them one time a week. In addition, we have implemented case conferencing to our school as a community to identify students who need academic and social intervention. These students are monitored carefully and provided with additional supports as well. We are continuously monitoring and revising our systems to ensure the students are being provided with the essential supports. We review and refine our structures for monitoring and sharing student social-emotional data as well as evaluating the effectiveness of our supports and programs in our school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of increased academic intervention programs (Achieve Now Academy) and Community Based Organization programs (D.R.E.A.M. Factory and Peer Leadership Arts Advocacy program) and supports during and after school, there will be a 2% increase in student attendance. In addition, with the support of the Medgar Evers College Liberty Partnership program funded through Medgar Evers College, this will support students preparing for college and career paths. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Sharing expectations with all constituents ● Providing on going social emotional support utilizing our Community Based Organization, Child Center of New York, Social Worker, Social Workers interns and Guidance and Youth Counselor Goal setting with all students • Reducing the number of level 4 and 5 disciplinary infractions through crisis intervention and behavioral supports  Increase post-secondary planning for students o Increasing the number of college trips and educational trips for all students is a key component and goal for our school community. Students will visit a college or university each month to provide them with the opportunities to prepare for college. Students will participate in on-site college and career representatives forums. The college advisor will work with the English department to help support students with the Personal Statements, letters of recommendation, SAT prep, CUNY assessment and other writing pieces essential to college preparation. I ● Providing more health screenings utilizing the services of our partner the MIC Clinic, teen pregnancy prevention program and other clinics to ensure students are safe at all times. ● Providing more Extended Learning Time programs that are linked to academic coursework through the DYCD program (Dream Factory) music and dance, creative outlet educational specialist in theatre arts and our part-time art teacher. In addition, we have been accepted into the Achieve Now Academy program which provides an opportunity for students who are a Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All parents All students September 2018-March 2019 All building administrators staff All students Guidance Staff/ Teachers All teachers All support Medgar Evers College Liberty Partnership Program, College Access for all team, guidance counselor and social worker, All building stakeholders working closely with student population, Administration, Child Center of New York, guidance counselor, social worker 9 few credits short from graduating to earn three additional credits for the year. ● Providing opportunities for students to be critical thinkers such as opportunities for debates and mock trials (The Young Debate Club) ● Implement the Young Men's Initiative mentoring program for boys that will address everyday issues for young men. In addition, we have expanded the Aspiring Girls Empowerment group to work with young women to be strong mentally, emotionally and socially through addressing issues they face on an everyday basis. More importantly, the young women aspiring group will partner with an Jackie Robinson Elementary school and I.S. 241 to mentors for 5th and 8th graders. ● Implement more basketball tournaments that are community wide with other transfer schools and outside organizations  Ensure effective attendance outreach by sharing positive  data with the entire community and celebrating milestones and benchmarks For instance, student's and school wide attendance is being monitored on a weekly basis. Additional home visits are being made by the Community Based organization and the school community to ensure students are in school.  The School run additional attendance reports and work with school staff to ensure accuracy at all times throughout the day and week . Admin. All Students October 2018-June 2019 All building administrators, CCNY staff, Parent Coordinator CBO All service providers and all students September 2018-June 2019 AP Administration, CCNY Counselors, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The parents will be provided various workshops during parent engagement night on the support services for their child. They will be able to meet the staff members who are responsible for their child academically, socially, physically and mentally. Each parent would have the opportunity to meet the advocate counselor, guidance counselor, classroom tutors and anyone who work with their child in that capacity. Our parent workshops meets twice a month; one on college and career readiness and the other on a social-emotional, physical health or support services needs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Medgar Evers College Liberty Partnership Program provides additional support for students in college and career readiness College Access for All Support for students applying for College ● CBO-CCNY works with students in Peer Leadership/Aspiring Girls Group/Dance/Step program 0  ● Guidance Staff (support students with college and career readiness programs and initiatives) ● Parent Coordinator( provide additional workshops for parents on the college and career readiness programs, provide workshops on academic programs and initiatives in the school) ● Teachers participate in after-school programs for the students ● Support staff to mail information home( On a monthly basis attendance letters are sent to parents). Also, Community Based Organization youth counselors send letters to parents regarding academic and social progress ● Emotional Literacy Best Practices ● Teacher and Administrator per-session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, there will be a 1% increase in attendance as a result of improved Community Based Organization supports, external guidance counselor, and school wide attendance staff. In September 2018, we will be implementing a program called adopting our students. Also, the College Access for All program will Adopt a Senior. These students will be monitored and tracked during the 2018-2019 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Bi-weekly/monthly attendance meeting with attendance reports and data analysis of trends and patterns of attendance in the school community. Also, data analysis of last year's attendance will be compared to this year's attendance and the improvement plan to implemented in our school. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength: While we have made progress in the areas of teacher collaboration and planning much of it is still done individually because we are a small school with very small departments. We have departments of 1, 2 and 3 with many teachers serving as the only ones teaching a particular course allowing for individual attention to students. Need: As per Advance Data based on the Danielson Framework for teaching, we have noted a need for teachers to implement more cognitively engaging lessons that include higher order questions and student-led discussions. There is also a need for summative assessments at the end of each lesson as this is not a consistent practice. Teachers also need to use this data to make on the spot adjustments to the lesson to meet the needs of the students in the moment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of professional development on how to implement cognitively engaging lessons that include higher order questions and student-led discussions, the English and Math growth percentile will increase by 2 points. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Effective use of collaborative time to plan will be reviewed. All teachers  Support teachers with individualized PD, collaborative inquiry, and common assessments to track progress All students September 2018-June 2019 Use of Lesson studies as a vehicle for collaborative inter-disciplinary planning will be explored All teachers November 2018-May 2019 Inter-visitations using protocols Professional Development on creating and evaluating formative and summative assessment All teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Review of the Danielson Framework for domain 3 on engaging and assessing students All teachers Specific professional development in Danielson Framework addressing Domain 3 (3b and 3c) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers, Administrators, Redesign educational consultant Teachers, Administrators, Teacher Leaders. Redesign Educational consultant Teachers, Administrators, Redesign educational consultant, Teacher Leaders Teachers, Administrators, Redesign educational consultant, Teacher Leaders Teachers, Administrators, consultant, teacher leaders December 2018 to June 2019 3  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. When parents attend the different parent meetings, we ensure parents are aware of the various support and strategies being utilized in the classroom to support their children in school. We often ask for parents to be supportive at home when possible to ensure their child continues on the road of success. Also, parents/guardians are provided with information while meeting with teachers and guidance about the various support system in the school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration and Redesign educational workshop will work with teachers through professional development Administrators will work with content departments on a weekly basis during meetings, observations and walk-throughs Teachers will meet with their colleagues through common prep periods Understanding by Design planning template Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be 1% increase in the number of students passing English and Math Regents compared with January and June 2016 results. The Regents exam will be used as a mid-point benchmark to ensure if progress is being made in Mathematics and English. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February 2019, the scholarship reports will be reviewed to ensure the meeting of the annual goal. If adjustments must be made to the current action plan for this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The schools mission is posted in every classroom and displayed in the lobby of the school. The school goals are created and shared in collaboration with the School Leadership Team. The goals are then posted publicly in an area visible to all. We use all our resources with the support of our Field Support teams to make strategic programmatic decisions to meet the needs of our unique transfer school population. We utilize the DOE Advance evaluation system to ensure that we meet all mandates for teacher evaluations. We will continue to refine and develop our practices around teacher pedagogy and family engagement to improve student achievement. Strength: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement Need: Development of teacher leaders who will use data and mentor colleagues in the use of data to drive student achievement particularly around social and emotional developmental health. Therefore, principal will create a Principal's Leadership Team which will comprise of each content area teacher, assistant principals and UFT chapter leader to work on the instructional outcomes for our school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of the implementation of school-wide teams that use data to analyze curriculum, pedagogy, school programs and social-emotion supports, there will be a 2% increase in the over-all graduation rate. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Restructured programming to involve common planning across all content areas (3 times a week) Teacher Leaders and all students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal Restructured the inquiry teams to address (9 and 10th) (special education) and (11th and 12th grade) -two times a month Create a Principal Leadership circle to meet bi-weekly on improving school culture, build teacher leader capacity and create bridge between teacher teams and administration. Monitor on a bi-weekly basis work of CBO's and assess impact of programs and adjust or modify as needed during cabinet meetings Reviewing students data including IEPS Training teacher leaders Creating goals for and with students Teachers and Guidance Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals Teacher Leaders Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals Disseminating information and progress reports to all constituents including the School Leadership Team and families. All constituents Sept.2018-June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals Ensure transparency of programs and status updates of goals for all stakeholders so that things can be modified if need be in order for all targets to be met. 6 Ensure clear tracking of progress; create a contingency plan to support student achievement in the event that the current plans that are not successful 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Aspirations Diploma Plus High school encourages our parents to get involved in the various school school-wide activities such as the school leadership team and parent-association. These parents are able to voice their opinions and provide suggestions on the various supports needed for students and parents in the school. The Parents, teachers, administration and guidance counselors are the key stakeholders to ensure implementation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Redesign will be the educational consultant for the teachers Administrators will be working with the teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 3% increase in the number of students on track to graduate as compared to February 2017 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The scholarship reports, attendance report and student progress reports will be reviewed to look at the benchmarks Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per our 2016-2017 Quality Review, The school consistently communicates with parents to provide academic updates and involve them with the students’ academic progress and school related activities. The Parent Coordinator sends home monthly newsletters informing parents of upcoming events, workshops, and student achievements. Additionally, the school utilizes Skedula Grades so that parents and students can access academic data daily and keep track of students’ academic progress. While this is an area of strength, we still see room for growth in moving from effective to highly effective. We wish to have a more reciprocal relationship with the community we are serving and hope to become a hub for academic and cultural events. We wish to increase parent attendance/ involvement in the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of improved outreach to families and the community, there will be a by a 2% increase in Safety on the New York City School Survey. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Advertise events through district parent engagement office Newsletters and electronic communications home and to students Student performances and awards showcases Weekly/Monthly meetings with PC to check on progress Assigning staff to care for and maintain the space Create a list of weekly and monthly events by surveying families on what interests them Motivational speakers Seek funding and support from local elected officials Ensure funding for parent activities Celebrations and cultural events College and career kick off and financial aid support 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Entire community; September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator and Administration Students, parents school community; Students, parents Entire community; Students, parents Entire community; Students, parents Parent Coordinator October 2018-June 2019 October 2018-June 2019 Administration, CCNY October 2018-June 2019 Administration, CCNY, guidance counselors and parent coordinator If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Medgar Evers College, MIC Clinic, Sound Studio, Barclay Center, Nets Rewards (Barclay Center), Young Debaters, Avenue Music Group, Bridging Access to Care, Opportunities for Better Tomorrow, G.I.A.N.T. Thinking (Growing is a noble thing), Gemnasium (Girls Empowerment), etc. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 9  Parent coordinator work with parents and families on resources in the community Library as a possible space for our dedicated community room Parents are provided with information through mailings and school messenger program The school has an open door policy for parents to meet with administration and teachers (teachers will be covered in classes to meet with parents) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the school will review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. This will include the parent-teacher conferences and different parent meetings being held in the school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The progress will be measured by information inputed in the P-Car system, regular sigh-in sheets and phone calls and outreach to parents. The program Skedula (pupil path) educational tool for parents to gain information about their child's academic and social progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Expand Regents Prep and Saturday School Small group tutoring During the school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Needs to take Regents or failed it previously Mathematics Science Social Studies Needs to take Regents or failed it previously Needs to take Regents or failed it previously Needs to take Regents or failed it previously At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) IEP mandated services, attendance issues, academic failures Blended learning and direct instruction Wilson reading program Regents Prep and Saturday School Blended learning Station teaching Regents Prep and Saturday School Regents Prep and Saturday School Blended learning and direct instruction Regents Prep and Saturday School Blended learning and direct instruction PLATO courses After school Utilize effective strategies/programs to support struggling readers Regents Prep courses Small group tutoring PLATO courses During the school day After school Regents Prep courses During the school day After school During the school day After school Small group tutoring PLATO courses Regents Prep courses One-to-one critical team meeting with student and/or family During the school day After school Small group tutoring PLATO courses Blended learning and direct instruction Regents Prep courses 1  2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 6 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The students in temporary housing is open to all opportunities in the school community which includes additional hours in the internship program, after-school tutoring, additional credit programs and support services. The support services includes meeting with the Youth Counselor to ensure their needs are met. in addition, students in temporary housing is provided with gift cards from the Community Based Organization to assist them with basic essential needs such as ( toiletries, clothing and food). These students are provided with a full fare metro card at all times. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3 The students in Temporary Housing will receive school supplies, sweatpants and t-shirts for the school year. In addition, the community based organization support students with meal and department store gift cards when necessary to ensure they have food and clothing. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Aspirations Diploma Plus High School has re-located to the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn. Our students are not typical high school students who move from middle school to high school. We serve students that struggled in their feeder high schools for a variety of reasons. All of our students had at least 1 year of high school somewhere else and felt the need to leave that situation and look elsewhere for opportunities to be successful. Over aged and under-credited students require non-traditional instruction and social emotional support and individuals who can provide this support. New York City has 52 Transfer Schools which has resulted in a small pool of applicants who have experience working with our population. Those hired to serve our students are screened for not just academic abilities and pedagogy but the ability to care and be open minded. The school utilizes the open market system and referrals by those who work at the school and have recommend colleagues who are a good fit for Aspirations. Through intense questioning and role playing, as well, as close scrutiny of references the school has been able to be fully staffed with a cadre of caring and supportive staff. Staff are observed at minimum as per contractual requirements and provided with feedback and support by administration and colleagues. At Aspirations, we have a Principal, two Assistant Principal Supervision and Assistant Principal Organization. We also have three guidance counselors, three special education teachers, three social studies teachers, three English teachers, three math teachers, two science teachers, a full time librarian, physical education teacher, art teacher, foreign language teacher, a parent coordinator, family worker, and an eight member community based organization that is on site with a director and assistant director. The staff is dedicated to our students and the goals of the school as demonstrated by the improvements in Regents pass rates, increased attendance and graduation rates . This change occurred as the whole school immersed itself in the data and committed to changing practices such as planning curriculum that is reflective of Understanding by Design. They have led and participated in professional development on site and off site to refine their practice. Every member of the staff understands that we have to treat each student on an individual basis as each one has a unique set of needs. This has resulted in one on one personalized attention to how the student learns and how to support that student. Our staff has been carefully selected over the years to be reflective of our students but also a mix of new and veteran teachers who bring different perspectives to the craft of teaching. Staff attendance and stability is excellent which is allowing us to build a sustainable model for changing the existing realities that are holding forces to a vision where every student is a not only a graduate but college and career ready. Seeing the staff here and prepared every day is a model of our expectations for our students as we work with them to improve their attendance and come prepared to learn. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 5  Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Redesign and Administration staff will work collaboratively with Aspirations High School in designing rigorous and engaging curricula maps and units that are CCLS-aligned and extend across the grades and content areas. Teaching Matters utilizes a professional development program with teachers and administrators called Teaching for Impact which has a comprehensive yet flexible design for interdisciplinary curriculum design It is expected in the second year, 85% of the classroom faced by challenges in classroom instruction identified in their last quality review or initial classroom observations or teacher evaluations, develop educational plans to address those challenges, by the end of the second program year, 70% of the school will have made substantial progress in addressing those challenges, and• by the beginning of the third program year, the school will have developed educational plans that use evidence of the quality of instruction to inform teacher support and retention efforts. Teachers will engage in inter visitations in school and at other lab sites, critical friends group, develop personal goals around areas of focus from the Danielson Framework and engage in professional collaborations that are aligned to the school’s instructional focus of developing literacy and problem-solving skills. Sustained professional learning and implementation of school-wide action plans: responds to noted progress gaps of previous cohorts, co-develops PLC expansion/action plans with principal and potentially extends the work to teacher leaders in other content areas. Ultimately, teams of teacher leaders sustain the work going forward in the school. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 6  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. NA 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 7   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Aspirations Diploma Plus High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [Aspirations Diploma Plus HS] will support parents and families of Title I students by: providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 9  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 0  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Aspirations Diploma Plus HS, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 1  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 3  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Brooklyn District 23 School Name Aspirations Diploma Plus High School School Number 646 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Sherma Fleming Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Michael Martella Teacher/Subject Area Matthew Milman Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Provided by BFSC Superintendent Paul Rotondo Assistant Principal Wayne Anderson Coach N/A School Counselor Sutanya Skeffrey Parent Lujany Brito Parent Coordinator Jawara Johnson Field Support Center Staff Member Tatyana Ulubabova Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 168 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 4 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.38% 5  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Program TBE TBE TBE DL Lang. K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Because Aspirations Diploma Plus High School is a Transfer high school, all of its English Language Learners attended another school prior to coming here. Accordingly, their initial assessment was done here. Nevertheless, the school's ENL teacher uses teacher-created assessment to determine the literacy skills of all ELL's and he makes instructional decisions based on the findings. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The teacher and other staff members work closely with the students providing them with the skills needed to ensure they understand the instructional material in the classroom. 6  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ELL program depends on several factors. We review scores generated by the NYSESLAT to monitor individual ELL student’s progress in the four modalities. On a school level we frequently check with content area teachers to ensure that students are maintaining and progressing with their basic interpersonal communication skills and cognitive academic language. Report cards and progress reports are closely monitored by the ESL coordinator to ensure that students are on task and acquiring enough credits for graduation. The ultimate goal for ESL students is graduation as well as proficiency in the English language as assessed by the NYSESLAT. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The teacher works closely with the student providing them with skills needed in the areas of deficiency. Students can attend tutoring sessions and after-school program to assist them on Wednesdays and Thursdays each week. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data from the 2017 NYSESLAT indicate that 30% of ELL students (3 students) took the NYSESLAT and tested at the commanding (2) or Expanding (1) level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The structures in place are to review all results and ensure students are scheduled properly during the school year to meet their needs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Delivery of Instruction a. ELL students are serviced by certified ENL/ELA teacher using a stand-alone ENL model. The program model is ungraded, heterogenous groupings and students are of mixed proficiency levels. b. The program model is ungraded, heterogenously grouped. Students are in mixed proficiency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A: c. DL program. If applicable. N/A: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 7  All ELL students receive the mandated minutes of instruction according to their level of English proficiency as per CR Part 154. Entering ELLs receive a minimum of 3 units of 540 minutes of ENL instruction; Emerging ELLs receive a minimum of 360 minutes of ENL instruction. Transitioning and Expanding ELLs receive a minimum of 180 minutes of ENL instruction; and Commanding students receive a minimum of 90 minutes of ENL instruction. All ENL instruction is delivered by a certified ENL teacher. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Instructional programs with high levels of rigor and support result in higher academic achievement for ELLs. Effective strategies used across all content areas include: differentiation, small group instruction, explicit academic vocabulary instruction, scaffolding (modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, metacognitive development, text re-presentation). We embrace Common Core Learning Standards in all academic departments, and as a result our school focus is on reading and writing across content areas. Studies show that native language development accelerates literacy gains in both the native language and English. As such, we offer language development and support for content instruction in the native language (or with native language support). Bilingual textbooks, glossaries and translated informational texts are provided, as appropriate. Teachers incorporate the use of bilingual audio/visual materials as well as technology into content area instruction to deepen content comprehensibility and enrich language development. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs have the option to participate in alternative assessments in their native language. This is facilitated in all content areas as all ELL students are provided with the opportunity to sit in class assessments as well as the NYS Regents examination in their native language. Spanish LAB and the ELE are administered as appropropriate. The research based rationale behind this approach indicates that profiency in the native language supports efficiency in the second language acquisition process. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Content areas are delivered in English with native language support. The ENL teacher collaborates with content area teachers to monitor ELLs' progress and to share effective ENL strategies. The strategies employed by all teachers include: differentiated instruction and a strong focus on reading and writing skills rooted in units with performance tasks and applicable rubrics aligned to Common Core Learning Standards. English is used for instruction in all classes along with native language support. Student progress will be assessed each making period in order to evaluate and revise interventions as appropriate. The ESL teachers and teachers across all content areas use research-based instructional strategies to include: activating prior knowledge; providing a print rich environment; engaging students in hands on activities; using realia, props, model activities; activating higher order thinking skills through sorting, categorizing, charting, mapping, diagramming; and explicitly teaching vocabulary. All instruction is delivered in English with native language support. Differentiated Instruction for ELL Subgroups are as follows: a. SIFEs are programmed for Freestanding ESL classes, Wilson Reading, and after school and targeted tutoring services to assist them in their language development and other content area skills. Instruction focuses on explicit vocabulary building and intensive academic literacy skills building. b. Newcomers – Students are programmed for Freestanding ESL classes and after school and tutoring services to assist them in their language development and cultural awareness. Students are provided instruction with the goal of simplifying language and amplifying content. Strategies include hands-on demonstrations, opportunities for role play, journal writing using native language or pictures. Students are taught basic vocabulary and are provided print rich materials to support their oral language development. c. Developing – Students benefit from freestanding ESL classes and after school and tutoring services to strengthen their 8  language acquisition skills. Instruction focuses on explicit vocabulary building and intensive academic literacy skills building. Teachers across content areas incorporate building skills for reading and analyzing informational texts, as well as writing opinions and arguments in response, in their instruction. d. Long Term ELLs – Our LTEs have near-native level of speech. Instruction includes: expand on figurative languages study, build academic language skills, focus on reading and analyzing non-fictional texts and writing opinions/arguments in response, and strengthen notetaking skills working with extended reading and listening passages. In addition to explicit vocabulary building and intensive academic literacy skills building, counselors and school support staff offer intensive social-emotional support to LTEs. e. Former ELLs - Former ELLS are programmed for at least one half of one unit of study of English as a New language each week for up to two years. In addition, they continue to receive certain specified testing accomodations during that time. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Students with disabilities – SWD-ELLs are appropriately served as per the student’s IEP. ESL, SpEd, NLA teachers collaborate to align curriculums with a focus on improving academic literacy skills. Bilingual textbooks, glossaries and translated informational texts are provided, as appropriate. Teachers incorporate the use of bilingual audio/visual materials as well as technology into content area instruction to deepen content comprehensibility and enrich language development. Teachers across all subject areas ensure that the four modalities: listening, speaking, reading, writing, are addressed in daily lessons. To maximize SWD-ELLs’ access to academic content, teachers provide the following instructional strategies: vocabulary instruction on academic language, use of graphic organizers, grouping, activating prior knowledge by building background; providing a print rich environment; engaging students in hands on activities; using realia, props, model activities; manipulatives, activating higher order thinking skills through sorting, categorizing, classifying, sequencing, charting, diagramming, teaching context clues skills. The ESL coordinator increase their communications with the parents of the SWD-ELLs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ESL, special education, and content area teachers collaborate in department meetings and as needed to discuss and share students' progress in order to ensure that each SWD-ELL is afforded instruction appropriate to his/her language and learning needs. Our school makes every effort to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. Our certified ESL teacher’s schedule is flexible enough to allow him to provide ESL instruction to ELLs during the regular school day(through reularly scheduled classes as well as through afterschool and twice-weekly 5th period tutoring). Additionally he is able to collaborate with the Special Education team to monitor individual ELL-SWD's progress in core subject classes. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Students are regularly scheduled for AIS tutoring with specific content area teachers based on their academic needs. Teachers access student information from various DOE data systems and other school level information to aid in developing background information to make informed instructional decisions. Teachers collaborate closely with the guidance department and the inquiry team to identify and encourage alternative educational programs as appropriate. The intervention services offered at our school range from: after school tutoring sessions (Regents and NYSESLAT); PM School and Saturday Academy in ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science; credit recovery; mandatory tutoring, and pulling out specific students from content area classes to provided one-on-one support to strengthen their Math and ELA proficiencies. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 9  We continue to review the success we have with ELLs. Our programs will continue and willl modified to further incoporate a differentiated approach in instruction. No new programs are being considered for the upcoming school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs will be discontinued 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 12a. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. ELLs are encouraged to attend after school tutoring and enrichment classes and participate in athletic and general school activities (basketball, art, dance, student government, school trips, college visits). Invitations, program/activity flyers, and notifications to parents and students are distributed in English and in students’ native language. 12b. We do not receive Title III allocations. However, we do offer programs that supplement instruction for ELLs in the core school day. Students are offered after-school tutoring services to build ELLs' Regents taking skills. In addition, PM School, Saturday School and parent meetings are provided as appropriate. The ESL teacher and the content area teachers meet regularly to plan and evaluate instruction in the program, monitor student progress, and strategize on additional differentiated support as needed. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. To support ELLs in content area classes, Smart Board technology, selected Internet translation and syntax/semantics/pronunciation- related sites, bilingual audio/visual clips to target multiple learning modalities are incorporated into instruction. Bilingual glossaries and dictionaries, bilingual content-specific textbooks, NYSESLAT preparation books, Regents preparation books, are employed. Bilingual textbooks, glossaries and translated informational texts are provided, as appropriate. Teachers incorporate the use of bilingual audio/visual materials as well as technology into content area instruction to deepen content comprehensibility and enrich language development. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is provided in ENL classes. Resources used include: bilingual glossaries, bilingual textbooks as available, translated texts, bilingual libraries, peer translators, bilingual audio/visual materials. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All support and services are adjusted to be age and grade appropriate. Support services are aligned to appropriate age and grade level through grade-team meetings in order to ensure Common Core Learning Standards alignment, curriculum alignment and age appropriateness. Sophomores and Juniors, who are preparing to take the Regents Exams, are given extra support in these areas. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? To support ELLs in content area classes, Smart Board technology, selected Internet translation and syntax/semantics/pronunciation- related sites, bilingual audio/visual clips to target multiple learning modalities are incorporated into instruction. Bilingual glossaries and dictionaries, bilingual content-specific textbooks, NYSESLAT preparation books, Regents preparation books, are employed. 0  Bilingual textbooks, glossaries and translated informational texts are provided, as appropriate. Teachers incorporate the use of bilingual audio/visual materials as well as technology into content area instruction to deepen content comprehensibility and enrich language development. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All new students to the school are invited to attend a summer orientation program conducted in English and students’ home language with appropriate translation support. Dual language letters are sent to students' homes inviting them to the event/ We also offer student/parent campus tours conducted in English and in the parents’ preferred language. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All ESL students are offered Spanish as a foreign language as well as the opportunity to take the NYC LOTE exam for their native language. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N?A: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teacher is currently : Paste response to question here: 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Paste response to question here: 1. Two full days of professional development are provided to all staf who are involved with ELLs to include: Assistant principals, subject area teachers, special education teacheres, guidance counselors, secretaries, office personnel and the parent coordinator. A minimum of 7.5 hours per year are devoted to ELL identification and instruction. During the school year, ESL and content area teachers are encouraged to attend training offered by: NYCDOE (OELL’s LAP-EPIC training; Math and CCLS, Demystifying ELL data), BETAC (NYSESLAT training), QTEL (scaffolding instruction for English Learners), Regional Special Education Technical Assistance Support Center (ELLs and SWD), and CFN 603 (ELL Identification and Placement, LAP workshops, BESIS, Meeting AMAO). 2. At the beginning of the school year, our ESL teacher and ESL coordinator work with counselors from our CBO, Child Center of New York, so they can assist ELL students as they transition from other schools or programs to our school. 1  3. Workshop certificates toward the 7.5 hours of ELL training for all staff are maintained by the school secretary and records of attendance are maintained by the Assistant Principal. Our Assistant Principal/ESL coordinator is in constant contact with content area teachers to help refine instructional strategies specifically related to the ELL population. Throughout the year all staff members receive a minimum of 7.5 hours of ESL training via staff meetings and inquiry led by trained personnel. Records of all meetings are kept in the Principal’s office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents of ELL students are scheduled to meet in the beginning of the school year with the ESL teacher and Special Education staff to to discuss their child's goals for the upcoming school year. The parents are provided with their child's transcript and other pertinent documentation that will help their progress in their program. Also, parents are informed throughout the school year with progress reports and letters from the school as well. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL involvement is included in all activities included SLT meetings and parent workshops for the child's education. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Sherma Fleming, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Aspirations Diploma Plus HS School DBN: 23K646 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Sherma Fleming Title Principal Wayne Anderson Assistant Principal Jawara Johnson Parent Coordinator Michael Martella ENL/Bilingual Teacher Lujany Brito Parent Matthew Milman Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A N/A Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Sutanya Skeffrey School Counselor Paul Rotondo Tatyana Ulubabova N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 N/A N/A N/A 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 N/A N/A N/A 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 23k646 School Name: ASPIRATIONS Superintendent: Paul Rotondo The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Since Aspirations High School is a transfer school we generally do not receive students that require the administration of home language identification surveys (HLIS). They've completed that process in their transfer school. If rules and circumstances change we are ready to administer a Home Language Survey. When a new student arrives, his or her parents are asked to complete the Home Language Identification Survery (HLIS) in the company of a supervising pedagogue, who also interviews the student and parent. Parents indicate their preferred language of communication on the HLIS. Parent letters, notifications, academic programs and interventions, and calendars need to be addressed in the students’ native language for full parental comprehension and involvement. Additionally, communication of the No Child Left Behind mandates, need be translated for parental information and discussion. 5  During summer orientation, and for all new students, the parent coordinator conducts and collects a school-wide native language survey that indicates all languages spoken by students and the primary language spoken in the home. For those LEP students on register, all school announcements and communications sent to homes - including dates and times of PTA meetings, lunch forms, special events, individual academic updates, graduation requirements, etc. - are issued in English and Spanish, as needed, as well as other languages spoken at home. Essential information about students and their parents who may require language and translation interpretation is maintained on "Blue Cards" accessible to administrators, teachers, and Child Center of New York, our community based organization. Information, including home language preferences, is updated at the beginning of each term. Administrators also regularly checks ATS data, including RHLA and RLER reports. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The preferred language is Spanish for families of 6 ELL students and TWI for 1 ELL student. Aspirations High School facilitates all communications and presents all printed materials to parents (brochures, letters, invitations, flyers) in English and in the parents' preferred language. Our PTA and SLT committees have been made aware of the school's written translation and oral interpretation needs. Faculty meeting time is utilized to summarize for teachers and other school personnel services the school provides. Language Number of Parents TWI 1 Spanish 6 Through review of data in ATS, we have ascertained that we have the following translation needs, both in written and oral communications: These needs have been determined through our staff’s interactions with parents from the school community, Parent-Teacher Association meetings, and Parent Orientation feedback forms, 6  learning surveys, and through feedback obtained at workshops for parents of ELLs. Furthermore, faculty have requested continued translation of key documents as appropriate for parent-teacher meetings to ensure that parents have the capacity to make informed decisions regarding their children. Our faculty, some of whom who are fluent in Spanish, will act as interpreters and translators for our Spanish Speaking parents when the need arises. The school will contact the Department of Education’s Translation and Interpretation Unit for services for high other language that are not actively spoken by staff members at the school and for translations of important documents. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We provide translated version when communicating school events. At times we translate offers of great opportunities for student or parent either by school, organizations, DOE, City etc. Letters that require a sign-off and fulfill compliance mandates are supplied in the parents’ home language. Of course, there are several notices we send 7  out periodically providing academic updates. Documents need to be translated by our support staff that are fluent in two or more languages and have experience translating documents from English into Spanish. Translation services will be used to provide information about a student’s academic performance and approaches to increasing achievement; enhance parents’ understanding of academic standards, assessments and tests. Other Department of Education programs that offer challenging learning opportunities and increase parent participation in school activities will be provided in the native language as well. The school will be in contact with the Department of Education’s Translation & Interpretation Unit for translation of critical documents into other languages as needed. The parent coordinator and other bilingual professional staff will assist with translation of letters. The school will keep a binder in the parent coordinator’s office containing translated documents and records of translations and interpretation services. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parents and students will participate in various face to face meetings. Before students are accepted to ASPIRATIONS they are interviewed by our CBO partner and school principal. They are also invited to participate in orientation, curriculum workshops in the first two months of school. Additionally they request to attend parent teacher conferences held three times a year. On a daily basis staff like teachers, guidance counselors, attendance teacher and intervention counselors call parents and count on in-house staff to stand by when parents have a need to communicate in a language other than English. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure8  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will fulfill Section VII of Chancellor's Regulations regarding parental notification for translation and interpretation services through the following steps: A. We will identify parents whose primary language is a covered language through intake procedures outlined above involving our parent coordinator, counselors from Child Center of New York, and school administration. We will regularly monitor appropriate ATS reports to ensure our data remain accurate and current. B. Our parent coordinator, working with school administration, will mail copies of required documents in parents' primary language and will follow up with calls home to make sure documents arrive. C. We will post mandated DOE posters near our main entrance, and in the parent coordinator's and Child Center of New York counselor offices, indicating the availability of interpretation services. We will access posters through this link: http://schools.nyc.gov/Offices/Translation/TipsandResources/Default.htm. D. We will use an early safety committee meeting to develop procedures for ensuring parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school's administrative offices solely due to language barriers. Meeting minutes will be maintained in a central location. E. Our parent coordinator will work with Child Center of New York and school administrators to make sure that parents whose primary language is a covered language know the link to the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Parent coordinator evaluates student home language needs periodically. The information is related to the guidance counselor as she frequently puts together family informative packets sent home with students. Some notices are also mailed directly home. If items need to be translated we try to use school staff if possible. Our second option is to seek the help of the translation unit. If they cannot help for any reason, we will seek an outside provider for assistance although we had not had the need to yet. Faculty members will be paid per-session to translate materials from English to Spanish. Two interpreter’s dictionaries will be purchased and used by the translators. Translators will assist in school events, such as, Parent-Teacher conferences, PTA meetings, workshops, and other meetings between DOE staff and non-English speaking parents. The school will contact the Department of Education’s Translation and Interpretation Unit for assistive services for high frequency languages that are not actively spoken by staff members at the school. 9  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We informally survey parents at each school meeting held at different times of the school year. This helps us modify any procedures currently in place. The information gathered is shared with school staff in periodic meetings. Furthermore all staff members are reminded to consult parents requesting they share any concerns when speaking with them be it face to face or telephone contact. 0 
