 19K662 School Name: LIBERTY AVENUE MIDDLE SCHOOL Principal: KAIA NORDTVEDT   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: LIBERTY AVENUE MIDDLE SCHOOL 331900010662 School Number (DBN): 19k662 BEDS Code: Grades Served: 6-8 School Address: 350 LINWOOD ST BROOKLYN, NY 11208 Phone Number: 718-647-1301 Fax: 718-647-1307 School Contact Person: KAIA NORDTVEDT Email Address: KNORDTVEDT@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): KAIA NORDTVEDT JebinYohannan Erika Sarmiento Miriam Plata EdgardoSanchez Student Representative(s): NA CBO Representative: NA Yasmin Schwartz District Information Geographical District: 19 Superintendent: Dr. Thomas McBryde, Jr. Superintendent’s Office Address: 557 PENNSYLVANIA AVE BROOKLYN NY 11207 Superintendent’s Email Address: tmcbryde@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-240-2740 Fax: 718-240-2747 Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Brooklyn North Executive Director: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston St Brooklyn NY 11201 Executive Director’s Email Address: BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-935-3954 Fax: 718-935-2382   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kaia Nordtvedt JebinYohannan Erika Sarmiento John Thomas EdgardoSanchez Yasmin Schwartz ChristinePublik Miriam Plata Shirley Matos Magdalena Nieto ChadaeWhitehead *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We believe in the ability of all students to achieve high academic success. Based on this belief, our school is one in which all community members are accountable for students making the strides necessary to be college and career ready. Through teaching that relies on personalized instruction, frequent checks of student understanding, and high levels of student engagement, our school can ensure that when students leave our school they are prepared for success in high school, in college, and in their career endeavors. We are a small learning community that recognizes the inherent struggles that face middle school students each day and yet we will not offer excuses for not reaching   the highest achievement levels. We will settle for nothing less than greatness for each and every student that is educated in our classrooms. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Liberty Avenue Middle School was founded in September of 2013 and will reach full capacity in school year 2015 – 2016 serving grades 6 through 8. The school population comprises 25% Black, 66% Hispanic, 2% White, and 6% Asian students. The student body includes 24.5% English language learners and 20% special education students. Boys account for 53% of the students enrolled and girls account for 47%. The average attendance rate for the SY 2017-2018 school year to date was 91.1%. We use several partnerships to support students’ social-emotional, academic, and character growth which include: ● Partnership with Children: Partnership with Children provides two licensed social workers and three social work interns Monday-Friday to support students and families. PWC provides students with individual and group counseling, advisory support, crisis and case management, attendance support, and push-in classroom support for teachers, and connection to outside services for families. ● School Out New York City: After School Program: In partnership with Cypress Hills Local Development Corporation our 6th grade class is enrolled and participating in a comprehensive after school programming. Students participate in athletics, arts, academic support and academic enrichment from 3:15 to 5:30 Monday-Friday with additional camp days during school vacation days and over the summer. ● Generation Ready: We are partnering with Generation Ready to support our development of rigorous curriculum to ensure academic proficiency for our students. Our consultant work with all content areas including ENL (English as a New Language) to ensure Common Core Learning Standards aligned units and yearlong curricula. ● New York City Teaching Collaborative: We partner with the Office of Teacher Recruitment and Quality in order to provide a pipeline of new teachers for NYC. We provide collaborative coaches in order to train new teachers during their pre-service time in our classrooms. This offers new teachers the opportunity to experience a high needs school with the support of a mentor teacher while simultaneously giving our students additional support in the classroom. In addition to our partnerships, we have begun several initiatives in our school that will shape the direction we move towards in the coming years. ● PROSE: We were selected as a PROSE school beginning in 2017-2018 which allows our school community to have flexibility around several contractual and state requirements. We are implementing an early dismissal for students one day a week next year to allow for a consolidated portion of time that teachers can use for professional development, teacher teams, and meaningful collaboration. In the years to come, we hope to explore additional PROSE ideas in order to maximize our impact on our students and families. ● Learning Partners: We were selected as a Learning Partner Host school in the fall of 2017-2018, and we have renewed this commitment for 2018-2019, which partners us with two partner schools to share best practices and collaborate in the spirit of mutual benefit. Our teachers will serve as model teachers both for our own staff and for staff from our partner schools to visit. ● Middle School Quality Initiative: (MSQI) Another important initiative for the 2017-2018 school year is our acceptance into MSQI. This citywide initiative is to support literacy across the entire school. With guidance and support from the MSQI coaches and partner schools, we will be able to establish and implement school wide literacy initiatives that are research based and tailored especially for middle school students.   3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. At Liberty Avenue Middle School we have a population of English Language Learners (ELLs) who are enrolled in various programs to help them learn English. We have a dual language program to support Spanish Language students in both English and Spanish and this program serves students in all grades at Liberty Avenue Middle School. This population needs support through co-teaching so that in all content area classes they are able to access the material regardless of their language ability in English. Our population of students with special needs is also a focus at Liberty Avenue. This population of students need individualized accommodations and modification to ensure that every child is meeting goals that are outlined in their own individualized education plan. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the past year, we have made significant gains in the element of Rigorous instruction based on our implementation of independent reading initiatives that have resulted in significant student gains on the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment from Fall 2017 to Spring 2018. In 2016 -2017 school year, our school made 3 points overall gain on the DRP. In 207 -2018, we implemented initiatives around independent reading, guided reading, and intervention supports resulting in a school-wide growth of 5 points in 2017-2018. We began working on conferencing with students based on their independent reading comprehension and supported students based on data from those conferences . This year our key area of focus will be on the element of 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K662 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 466 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 18 18 6 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 9 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 94.4% % Reduced Lunch 17.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.6% 71.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.16 3% 59% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 27.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 64 64 90.6% 1.7% 21.9% 19.7% 4.7% 2.6% 4 28% 6.1 26.4% 25% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Liberty Avenue Middle School has received well-developed on our curriculum from our PPO evaluation. Our strengths include modifying the Code X curriculum which is common core aligned as well as creating our own math curriculum aligned to Engage NY. We have worked to ensure proper scaffolds for ELLs and SWD ensuring that every child can access the curriculum and are set up for success. During the 2017-2018 school year, we established a school wide independent reading program. Our students took the DRP assessment three times over the course of the year. School-wide, the following growth was made from the fall to the spring assessment: 6th grade: 6 points, 7th grade: 4 points, 8th grade: 4 points. 2. For the 2018-2019 school year, we plan to continue and improve our independent reading program as well as strive to continue to raise students' DRP scores in order to get our students closer to grade level. Based on the data from last school year, we have set new, higher goals for 2018-2019. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through the implementation of a daily 45 minute block of independent reading tracked by student reading logs, every students' DRP score will raise by a total of 6 points from the Fall 2018 to the Spring 2019 DRP administration. Student reading fluency and comprehension will be supported through bi-weekly conferencing with their reading teacher and their morning meeting advisor, which will include fluency work and checks for comprehension to ensure students are grasping what they are reading and not just words being read. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Programming to allow each class to have 45 minutes of independent reading in their daily schedule based on research that indicates that students need to read books on their level that interest them in order to make significant reading gains. Curriculum and conferencing professional development for reading teachers. Training on reading log implementation, and how to track student reading progress. Bi-weekly conferencing with the teacher for each student in order to monitor student progress towards their DRP goal. The needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH) will be addressed through professional development to teachers around home language reading instruction, sustained independent reading, conferencing with students to guide comprehension, and discussion protocols for reading comprehension and expression of understanding, and how to scaffold reading strategies for ELL, SIFE, STH, and other high need subgroups. Bi-weekly conferencing with the teacher for each student in order to monitor student progress towards their DRP goal. NA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students Principal August 2017 through June 2018 Reading Teachers Teachers August 2017 through June 2018 Generation Ready curriculum consultants and teacher leaders August 2017 through June 2018 MSQI, administration, model teachers, and Generation Ready consultants. NA NA NA How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During our parent teacher conferences over the course of the year, parents will receive updates on their students' growth on the DRP. Additionally, we will share book lists and tips for discussing books at home with parents. The parent coordinator will continue to host monthly parent workshops where she will share best practices to support independent reading at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 3  We will be funding two reading teachers from our Tax Levy allocation in order to implement our independent reading curriculum. We will be using Title I funding as well as Title III funding to purchase level appropriate books in both English and Spanish so that students are reading books that are at their level and interest them. We will schedule students to have independent reading daily for 45 minutes. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, each student will have gained 3 points on their Fall to Winter DRP assessment putting them on track to meet the 6 point goal. If a student does not show they are on track at this mid-point assessment, then they will be assigned to academic intervention groups for additional support. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will be giving the DRP assessment three times: baseline in the Fall, progress monitoring assessment in the Winter, and Spring summative reading assessment to track student growth. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. Our students feel safe and respected in our school. According to informal surveys we give to our students as well as the School Learning Environment Survey. According to the survey results, 98% of the students feel safe in the school, and 95% of the students say that teachers help them when they are upset. 2. The need to be addressed in this framework element is our school-wide attendance. At the end of the 207-2018 school year, our average school wide attendance was 91.1%, which was a decrease from the 2017-207 school year, and below several of the schools in district 19. 3. For the 2018-2019 school year, we will have a dedicated staff member who will establish structures to engage the students and families of our chronically absent students. We will continue to celebrate and honor the students who have consistently positive attendance patterns. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our overall school attendance will be 93% up from 91.1% in 2017-2018. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Weekly attendance meetings with attendance coordinator, guidance counselor and social work team. During the meeting, we will review reports from ATS (RSAL, RCUA), discuss new and open 407 cases, and create actions plans for each of our chronically absent students. Weekly parent outreach to the families of chronically absent students. Together, families, students and the parent coordinator will develop and follow up on action plans. Outreach to the families of students that have been absent more than 3 days in a row. NA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? long term absentees and students with low attendance chronically absent students students with 3+ days in a row of absences September 2018-June 2019 attendance coordinator September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 attendance coordinator attendance coordinator NA NA How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The Attendance Coordinator will do weekly outreach to the parents of chronically absent students as well as students who are absent for more than three days in a row in order to collaborate on action plans to ensure students attendance at school. Daily, we will use school messenger to inform parents when their child is absent from school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use our Tax Levy money to support the salary of the attendance coordinator. We will use tax levy to purchase school messenger to inform parents of attendance. We will also use title I to purchase Skedula so that parents can track attendance. We will use Title I money to support parents with any resources they may need to get their students to school regularly. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 6  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019, our year to date school wide attendance will be at least 92%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use different ATS reports to monitor our progress toward this goal including: RSHA, RPAC, RISA, RSAL, RCUA, RDAL. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Based on Advance 2017-2018 Teacher Performance Overview report, our teachers' strengths lie in their ability to collect and use data within their lessons as evidence by Danielson 3d rating component score of 2.87 which is highest in domain 3. Our teachers also have strength in classroom management based on their Danielson 2a component rating score of 3.15. Liberty Avenue MS also received a proficient in 4.2 Teacher Teams on our Fall and Spring principal performance ratings. 2. Based on Advance 2017-2018 Teacher Performance Overview report, our teachers' priority needs lie in the component 3c on Danielson based on the overall rating of 2.7 in this high leverage component. This component is also the District 19 focus for 2018-2019 as we will be focusing on how to move our ELL and SWD students. Liberty Avenue MS will use our goal in Collaborative Teachers to increase teacher capacity to plan and differentiate their lessons for all learners which speaks directly to component 3c. Our action plan includes providing teachers with professional learning opportunities throughout the year in order to grow their capacity around engagement, differentiation, and rigor in order to increase their performance in 3c thus resulting in higher levels of student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the average component rating for Danielson 3c: Engaging Students in Learning will be 3.2. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Instructional programs include the implementation of the MSQI framework as well as implementing differentiated programs for targeted students such as STARI. We will provide professional learning through our MSQI coach, our consultants through Generation Ready, and through our internal cycles of learning with feedback from colleagues and administration. The structures that need to be in place to impact change include training on STARI, calendar dates with coaches and consultants. As well, frequent intervisitations by teachers and observations by administration in order to give feedback on the implementation of professional learning and its impact on 3c. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH) include: providing targted professional development on scaffolds that are effective for ELLs, SWD, SIFE, and STH. These can be included in our cycles of learning. Teachers will also receive training on culturally relevant pedagogy and currilculum in order to make learning engaging (3c) for all students including: of students with disabilities, English language learners, overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH NA NA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers August 2018- June 2019 MSQI coach and administration as well as model teachers. Teachers August 2018- June 2019 MSQI coach and administration as well as model teachers. NA NA NA NA NA NA How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Liberty Avenue MS will engage parents and families in order to support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers by implementing workshops addressing the topics that teachers are engaging in during their cycles of learning. This strategy will help parents to see that a teacher's growth is pivotal to their student's academic progress. Our parent coordinator will implement these workshops during each of our three cycles of learning in November, February, and in May. The princpal and assistant principals will supervise the Parent Coordinator to ensure the workshops are happening and that parent input is solicited. 9  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use the human resource of the administrators to enter Advance reports so that we can use the reports to track teacher progress. We will use our Title I money to support professional learning for MSQI and Generation Ready. We will use Title III to support parent workshops on what they can expect in their child's classroom and how they can support their learning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administrators will run Teacher Component Overall ratings on advance in December, March and May in order to track the progress of teachers aligned to component 3c. By December, ratings should be at 2.9 or above, by March they should be at or above 3.1 and by May we want to see teachers average being at or above 3.2. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will be using Advance reports to track this progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The principal received a well-developed on monitoring and revising goals (5.1) as well as goal setting (3.1) on most recent principal performance rating which speaks to the school's strength in setting goals for teachers and then growing their practice through supportive practices that encourage growth and then translating teacher growth to impact student outcomes. The school has also received 2. Teachers need to develop their leadership skills and own their implementation of professional development in their classroom so their ratings for 3c improve and translate into moving student achievement. Based on Advance data from 2017-208, we see that teacher performance in 3c is behind other components and it is a high leverage component. Therefore, we want to prioritize our resources in leadership development to address a teacher need through cohesive professional development led by teachers so they are invested and excited to change their practice. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers at Liberty Avenue Middle School will have completed three cycles of learning led by their colleagues addressing aspects of Danielson 3c. Teachers will complete a survey at the end of each cycle and the goal will be that by the final survey 95% of responses will be net positive based on improvements made by implementing teacher feedback from previous cycles of learning. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will use our professional development from Generation Ready and MSQI to support the planning and implementation of our cycles of learning. We will use our professional development time as a structure for weekly professional learning time. We will use the structure of surveys in order to track the response to the cycles of learning. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH) include: having the cycles of learning speak directly to these important subgroups and how to address their needs within lesson planning, scaffolds, differentiation, and flexible grouping. The cycles of learning can track the impact of these strategies by using student work protocols focusing on student work from these subgroups of students. NA NA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers August 2018 - June 2019 Model Teachers and Administration Teachers August 2018 - June 2019 Model Teachers and Administration NA NA NA NA NA NA How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families by inviting them to attend professional development. Our parent coordinator will create parent facing documents in order to educate families on what teachers are learning and how the teachers' knowledge will impact their student's learning. Parents will receive these documents during each cycle of learning in December 2018, March 2019, and May 2019 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use our model teachers to support our cycles of learning which comes from fair student funding. We will use Title I money to support parent workshops and supplemental materials like professional learning books for parents 2  and teachers. We will use our Title III money to ensure we have language specific materials for parents of our ELL students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will provide surveys to our teachers at the conclusion of each of the three cycles of learning. The surveys will take place in December 2018, March 2019, and May 2019. We want to see at least 80% positive responses in December, 90% by March and 95% by May in order to meet our goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will be administering surveys at the conclusion of each of the cycles that will track teacher feedback from the cycles of learning. The surveys will inform what adjustments need to be made in order for the next cycle to have a greater impact on student learning. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Liberty's strengths: According to the 2016-2017 NYC School Survey, 97% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that school staff regularly communicate with them about how they can help their child learn. 94% of parents said that they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance. 2. Priority Needs: For the 2018-2019 SY, we will be continuing to build strong partnerships with families by providing more ongoing and up-to-date information about student progress, as well as increasing the number of parents who have access to our online grading platform Pupilpath. According to the 2016-2017 NYC school survey, 84% of teachers answered that teachers at this school work closely with families to meet student needs, as compared to the city's average of 93%. Teachers are the driving force behind student's academic progress and it's crucial that they have ongoing communication with families so that all stakeholders can support the student. Increasing the number of times we share evidence of student learning and increasing the number of parents/guardians who have registered for Pupilpath/Skedula will help to ensure that families have ongoing and up-to-date information about their student's progress at their fingertips. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Liberty Avenue will share a hard copy of evidence of student progress at least 7 times a year and make evidence of student progress available electronically at all times. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? During the first 4 sessions of teachers' parent engagement time on Wednesday afternoons, teachers will divide into small teams and be responsible for making outreach to parents of students in a particular class. Their goal will be to make contact and collect as many up-to-date phone numbers and email addresses of parents/guardians and document them in a Google Drive document that will be made accessible to all staff members. guidance counselor, teachers, parent coordinator Once emails have been collected, teachers will help parents register for Pupilpath and communicate their login information to parents so that they can have immediate access to students' grades, as well as a option to communicate directly with teachers via the platform. All teachers, parent coordinator and guidance counselor August 2018 - June 2019 Administration, parent coordinator August 2018 - June 2019 Parent coordinator, Administration On Wednesday afternoons, teachers will have a Parent Engagement block to schedule face-to face meetings (individual or group) with parents or guardians; telephone conversations with parents or guardians to address any concerns, needs and/or achievements about the their child and update grades/anecdotals on Skedula. Parent Teacher Conferences will be held in September, November, March, and May. Progress reports will be sent home to parents/guardians in October, December and March. Report cards and DRP family letters will be distributed in November, February, April 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All teachers August 2018 - June 2019 Administration All Teachers August 2018 - June 2019 Administration If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Partnership with Children makes regular parent outreach for students on their caseload and holds at least 2 parent events per school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 5  Title 1 funding will be used to purchase Pupilpath/Skedula, the online grading platform that gives parents/guardians ongoing and up-to-date information on their students' academic and behavioral progress. Fair Student Funding will be used to purchase School Messenger, which sends phone messages to families every time a data report gets sent home. Title 3 funds will be used to plan parent workshop on how to register to Pupilpath/Skedula and use all the features of the online grading platform. In addition, parents/guardians will receive guidance on how to interpret data reports and support students at home in order to make academic gains. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, Liberty will have shared evidence of student progress with families at least 3 times. Liberty Avenue will invite parents for monthly "parent conversations," PTA workshops on a variety of topics related to rigorous instruction to ensure that families are aware of the progress that students are making on the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) for the 2018-2019 SY and to encourage families to support their children at home. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Pupilpath/Skedula is the online grading platform that is available to all parents and students who register. Ongoing academic and behavioral progress of students in each of their courses is made available, including options to communicate directly with teachers. We will measure the number of parents who have registered for the platform as one evidence of outreach to parents. Progress reports from Pupilpath/Skedula will be generated 3 times per year. Report cards will be generated from STARS for each marking period. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) DRP and Achievement Network data as well as student work analysis from performance tasks NYS Math scores, Achievement Network scores and growth on performance tasks literacy and math data, internal formative assessment data on performance tasks literacy data, internal formative assessment data and reflection on performance tasks At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) observational and anecdotal data from teacher teams and Skedula provided to Pupil Personnel Team for review and referral Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Strategic reading, after school tutoring, Academic Intervention Support periods numeracy intervention, after school tutoring, Academic Intervention Support periods Pre-teaching, non fiction reading support, supplemental materials and labs Non-fiction reading support, supplemental content support (video, higher levels of text differentiation, pre-teaching) and writing support Counseling services provided by guidance counselor and social workers provided by Partnership With Children Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) small group, one to one small group small group AIS school day, after school with Title III for ELL students and Saturday Academy for all struggling students. AIS school day, after school with Title III for ELL students and Saturday Academy for all struggling students. AIS services during the school day. small group AIS services during the school day. Small group and one-to-one counseling school day 7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently, we have 69 students in temporary housing attending our school. This number changes throughout the year but does tend to remain close to 14.6% of our school's total population. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 8  We provide many services to our STH population. We provide at least three full uniform sets for each child and provide more uniforms as the need arises throughout the year. We also ensure that all STH have full access to field trips, class activities, and senior events by allocating our funds for their participation. We also purchase backpacks with supplies and age appropriate books in the backpacks so that students are fully able to participate in school and read at home. Finally, we ensure that students have access to our school food program, know the community resources available to them through our parent coordinator, and connect them with outside social services through our collaboration with Partnership with Children. This year we have also added a food pantry in our school for students to access emergency food for their families as needed. As well, we will be installing a washer and dryer in order to clean uniforms as necessary for our STH. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to recruit and retain highly qualified teacher, we have established a rigorous hiring protocol that includes writing samples, group interviews, demo lessons, and submission of unit plans and lesson plans. A hiring committee comprised of a wide representation of our teachers evaluates all candidates to ensure alignment to our mission, vision, and fit with school community. Based on the recommendations from the hiring committee, offers to join our team are sent given. Through this model, we believe we are setting a high standard for what it means to be a teacher at Liberty Avenue Middle School and that we value and need input from all stakeholders. In order to retain teachers, we work to ensure that their assignments are aligned with not only their individual preferences but the needs of the school. We provide the time and space in all teachers schedules for weekly team meetings, on-going common planning time, and mentoring support for new teachers. We also believe in frequent informal observation cycles to provide support and feedback to all teachers to ensure they are on track to raise student achievement and can increase the impact their instruction immediately. In addition, we work to create teacher leadership roles such as staffing model teachers, grade team leaders, and team meeting facilitators so that teachers can maintain their growth within our school. Our professional development is tailored to each teacher's’ needs and is an ongoing support. As a result of our PROSE vote, we have over two hours each Wednesday to engage in collaborative professional development with our Generation Ready consultations and our coaches from MSQI. Teachers are also working in inquiry teams to look at student work through an inquiry based approach in order to analyze student work, diagnose trends, and make necessary adjustments to their teaching practices. Teachers are also sent to other schools for professional development with their colleagues both to collaborate with other pedagogues but also to see what practices are already in place at other schools and if those practices would be successful at Liberty. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The school has several streams of professional development happening throughout the year. In terms of teachers, we will be using Generation Ready to support new teachers and to support the revision of curriculum to ensure it is both rigorous and provides entry points for all subgroups (ELLs, GT, and SWD). This professional development will take place on a weekly basis during our allotted time on Wednesdays due to our PROSE vote allowing us to have concentrated times of focus for this professional development. In addition, we will have a coach from MSQI in the building on a regular basis supporting our teachers’ growth in implementing a school wide literacy program based on research tenets embedded in the MSQI approach. Teachers will be receiving ongoing professional development 0  through MSQI. Teachers will also receive coaching from administrators around instruction, from Partnership with Children around student behaviors and classroom management, and from Ramapo on socio-emotional learning. Teachers also participate in our Learning Partners Cycles of Learning and interschool visitations in order to growth their practice and support other schools in growing their own practice. For leadership, we will continue our own professional development by going on Showcase School visits, partaking in district leadership conferences, attending MSQI professional development alongside our teachers and using our new role as Host Learning Partners school to connect with other principals to gain ideas and insights to improve our own school. Leadership will also participate in district level administrator training like the assistant principal learning sessions. Paraprofessionals and other staff will attend professional development opportunities directed school leadership including teacher leaders. This professional development will seek to enhance the instruction that is happening in the classroom with regards to paraprofessionals. For our Parent Coordinator, we will send her to district professional development opportunities in order to support the increase in parent involvement and meaningful parent events we offer. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are integrally involved in developing and selecting performance tasks and assessments that measure student achievement within each unit of study. The reflection and revision aspect of our performance tasks will integrally involve teachers as this is a part of our goal surrounding rigorous instruction. These tasks are CCLS aligned and 1  promote critical thinking as well as requiring students to use their higher order thinking skills. Teachers develop these tasks in common planning time and during teacher team meetings. We also provide professional development around assessments and the use of data to drive instructional decisions. We use our Achievement Network coach to support teachers in the analysis and use of student data. As well, we involve teachers in revisions of our core instructional systems like grading policies, team data tracking ,and data action protocols so that our systems reflect teacher input and thus increases investment. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 369,452 0 12366 NA 3,620,302 X NA X NA X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 2 Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A in part 4a, Section 5B in part 4a, Section 5C part 4a, Section 5D part 4a and Section 5E part 4a NA Section 5A in part 4a, Section 5B in part 4a, Section 5C part 4a, Section 5D part 4a and Section 5E part 4a NA Section 5A in part 4a, Section 5B in part 4a, Section 5C part 4a, Section 5D part 4a and Section 5E part 4a  advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 3   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Liberty Avenue Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Liberty Avenue Middle School's Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of Liberty Avenue Middle School's Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Liberty Avenue Middle School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; 5  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Liberty Avenue Middle School will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; 6  ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Liberty Avenue middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum I. School Responsibilities: Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 7  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with Elementary and Secondary Education (ESSA). II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; III. Student Responsibilities 8  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 9 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: After School Schedule and Duration: Our after school program runs Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Friday from 3:15 to 5:30. It will begin on November 1, 2018 and it will run until June 1, 2019. Rationale: This program will support language development for all students not demonstrating proficiency on the NYSESLAT. Data analysis of the NYSESLAT exam from 2017 (and anticipated data from the 2018 NYSESLAT) indicate that our entering, emerging and transitioning ELLs are not making as much progress on the reading and writing sections of the NYSESLAT as they are on the speaking and listening modalities. Additionally, teachers have held reading and writing conferences with students and gathered qualitative data, which indicates that students are facing the greatest challenges in making progress in the modalities of reading and writing. Sub Groups/Grade Levels 6th, 7th and 8th grade students will be served in this after school program. Students will be divided into groups based on their most recent score on the NYSESLAT exam (entering, emerging, transitioning, and SIFE subgroups). Further sub-groups will be created based on EDAT data from ATS in order to support students on the modalities they need the most support in. Language of Instruction: English Types of Certified Teachers: 3 of the teachers in the after school program are highly qualified ESL teachers, and 3 of the teachers are highly qualified bilingual teachers. Two of the teachers are also certified in Wilson. Types of Materials: All materials used in after school are supplemental and separate from those used during daily instruction. Rosetta Stone, Finish Line ELLs (Continental Press) and Native Language trade books will be used in the after school program. Records ATS section sheets are printed indicating which students are enrolled in the program and a Google Doc will be used to record daily attendance. Parent Notification: 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Parents are notified daily via school messenger of their students attendance in the program. Parents will be notified of their respective students progress in their preferred home language on a monthly basis. Home Language Support Students will read trade books in their home language. Instructional Activities: Students will be engaged in reading, writing, speaking and listening English. Rationale: Our teachers are receiving training and professional learning opportunities in rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: · 3c for 2018-2019 as this aligns to our instructional focus and was the lowest&nbsp;rated indicator for Danielson this past year.&nbsp; 3c is a high leverage indicator and speaks to a teacher's ability to differentiate, make lessons rigorous, and make lessons engaging.&nbsp; We will work with our teachers on lesson planning and flexible grouping to leverage their work in 3c.&nbsp;&nbsp; · training in differentiation, rigor, and grouping so that all students have entry points into a lesson and are being challenge appropriately for every lesson. · will be approximately 30 professional learning sessions for these teachers.&nbsp; · acquisition&nbsp;strategies, lesson planning with language objectives, and flexible grouping.&nbsp; · support from the Field Support Center. Name of provider: Generation Ready will provide the professional development with Teachers to receive training: Our ENL and bilingual teachers will all receive targeted Schedule and duration: Our schedule is 1:45 - 3:15 on Wednesdays every week so there Topics to be covered: Topics to be covered are differentiation, language Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities 2  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Rationale: Based on survey data collected by our Parent Coordinator Suheilee Vaquez, we offer a weekly ESL class for our parents from 10:30-11:30 on Wednesdays. The total number of session is 30. Parent Notification: Parents are notified via school messenger in their preferred home language as well as via weekly parent newsletters, which are in the parents preferred home language. Topics Covered: Supporting students in the Common Core; Supporting your child in language acquisition Translation Services: At the weekly meetings, our Parent Coordinator will translate for the Spanish speaking families, and we will have a phone interpreter available for our Arabic speaking families Cost: There is no cost for this program Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA NA NA NA NA NA Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. 3 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA NA NA NA Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 19 School Name Liberty Avenue Middle School Borough Brooklyn School Number 662 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kaia Nordtvedt Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Rachael Williams Teacher/Subject Area Lauryn Crowe ENL and HLA Teacher/Subject Area Clarissa Acevedo ENL Related-Service Provider Generation Ready Superintendent Dr. Thomas McBryde Jr. Assistant Principal Jennifer Rygaliski Coach type here School Counselor Aleira Rosa Parent Magdelina Nieto Parent Coordinator Suheilee Vazuez Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 D. Student Demographics 5  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 462 Total number of ELLs 112 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 24.24% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 1 1 1 1 2 2 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 4 0 0 4 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We rely upon the data we receive from Spanish Lab exams to address our Spanish speaking student's home-language literacy levels upon arrival to our school. For the non-Spanish speaking and for students who have some literacy skills in English (evident through classroom instruction, and NYSITELL administration) we follow standard Fountas and Pinnell protocol, beginning with a words you know list, before testing a student with a suggested leveled text. Once a students level has been assessed we proceed with independent level and instructional level texts, and monitor student growth with Fountas and Pinnell format running records. Our school also uses a computerized reading program called Achieve3000. This program not only assesses students electronically, it provides leveled texts (in a variety of languages) on the same topic to suit the needs of individual students during content classes. Finally once EBs have reached a transitioning level (somewhat advanced level) of literacy, our school also employs a digital DRP literacy assessment test, however the data is only useful once the student tests 6  above a certain literacy level. Each of these systems (and many in combination with one another) offer insight into our students' literacy strengths and weaknesses and this data is then used to develop and continually adapt their instructional plan. Currently we are in the processing of administering DRPs to those ELLs capable of being assessed in this manner, and Fountas and Pinnell running records to those who we are not. The DRP results show that our long-term ELLs read significantly below grade level (3 to 4 levels). 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our ESL coordinator and pupil accounting secretary work together to ensure that all students that are eligible for the NYSITELL within 10 days of their admit date. All of our reading and ELA teachers are trained to administer the the Fountas and Pinnell so that we can accurately assess and track students' reading levels. We use interim assessments from Achievement Network to track and monitor student progress against content standards in ELA and Math. Teachers use these interim assessment data points to customize their instruction for the ELLs based on their needs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We monitor the proficiency levels, and growth among our EB students closely, with a varied curriculum and multi-type assessments, to evaluate students authentically in each modality (speaking, listening, writing and reading). We rely upon in-class assessment data, final performance tasks as well as other formative assessment tasks to assess an EBs progress throughout a given unit. We refer to NYESLAT scores to understand a student’s growth and progress over the course of a whole year (in most cases) of instruction. Since Liberty Avenue Middles School is also committed to ensuring a healthy social-emotional learning environment as well, we consider students' well-being as a sign of success. EB students in our school in particular, rely upon the support and guidance of ENL teachers and other school leaders as they adjust to a new country, school, and language. The frequency with which students ask questions, request assistance, and participate positively towards their language acquisition are also considered signs of success of our ENL program. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? During teacher team meetings, teachers analyze data and engage in a kid talk protocol to identify specific skills in which a student is struggling. Together as a team and using the PRIMS manual as a resource, they identify interventions to implement to support the student. Teachers then track the success of that intervention by collecting student work and analyzing it to determine the impact of the intervention. If it was successful, the intervention continues; if it isn't, the teachers identify a new strategy and monitor the progress of that intervention. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. At the beginning of the year when creating our programs for our students, we use the previous year NYSESLAT score to program all of our current ELLs. As new students enter over the course of the school year, we use the NYSITELL results to determine placement for the student. Over the course of the school year, teachers use both formative (observations, conversations with the students, student work) and summative (tests, quizzes, NYS exams) assessments to monitor and track student growth. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 7  We have a school wide data tracker that all teachers have access to. The Data Specialist updates this tracker any time new data is available. Additionally, we use the Skedula platform for grading purposes, and several pieces of student data are available here. We also share data progress and monitoring updates bi-weekly at our whole staff PDs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students are grouped according to their specific needs as English learners. The majority of our students who receive stand-alone ESL are grouped in an ICT setting, so that they benefit from additional teacher support and small group instruction throughout their core-content classes. The ELLs in this program are all pulled out for additional free-standing ESL support at various points in their schedule. This group of students travels together for stand alone ESL periods and at times are in ENL classes with other ELLs of the same or similar proficiency level, however from various grades. Teachers organize their individual classes using homogeneous and heterogeneous groupings depending on the objectives of the lesson and the particular students in question. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Students in our Dual Language program travel together as a class through all of their scheduled classes, with exception of their English Language Arts class. During this time, the Entering, Emerging and Transitioning students (according to NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results) are pulled out for a separate stand alone ENL class component, to develop English proficiency and practice language uses that will benefit them in their other classes. This group of students travels together for any form of assessment where they may be eligible and others are not (such as taking a Spanish Lab exam or during a state practice exam for example. Otherwise these dual language classes move entirely as one cohort or group of students. For the majority of their core classes instruction is conducted primarily in English, and additional supports are provided in Spanish. Our teachers use the Bilingual Common Core Progressions to differentiate their instruction for the different levels of ELLs in the classroom. They also use visuals, and other resources are implemented to accommodate these students in their core content classes, and when available a co teacher helps provide language support as well. For each of our dual language in 6 th , 7 th and 8 th grade, they receive their core-mathematics instruction in Spanish. English literary skills are also included in these courses, however the majority of the classes are conducted in Spanish. Teachers organize their individual classes using homogeneous and heterogeneous groupings depending on the objectives of the lesson and the particular students in question. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Once we receive our NYESLAT data from the year previous and NYSITELL results for incoming students, we group the students according to their levels and required minutes. Once we have established which students from which grades need 360 minutes, we begin to plan and organize their cohorts and program so that they receive those required minutes throughout their weekly school schedule. We follow a similar procedure for Expanding and Commanding ELLs as well. For the students who received Commanding sores, according to part 154 these students' progress should still be monitored for a total of two years, to ensure that perceived progress is maintained and accurate. HLA considerations are met over the course of a students' 8  three years in Liberty. These groups of students receive as many as 6 periods of HLA per week to accommodate their required minutes in this subject area. The HLA curriculum is modeled after the ELA and Social Studies curricula for each grade to provide additional content and linguistic support for these students. ELA minutes are also calculated that each student attending Liberty receives the appropriate amount of minutes, as well as for the Emerging Bilingual students, be it in an inclusive or separated setting these minutes are met throughout their school week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. For, both our Dual language program as well as our Stand-alone ESL program, each of the core-content area classes are conducted primarily in English with some Spanish language support for our dual language classes. Our teachers use the Bilingual Common Core progressions. Math is taught elusively in Spanish for our dual language classes. And math is taught in English for the Stand-alone ESL program. Each core-content class has at least one class set of text books in Spanish, even if the teacher does not speak Spanish, the students are still able to access material on the subject. Co teachers and ENL department staff work to provide suggestions for modifications in these classes to provide the support our EB students need to learn both content and language simultaneously. Modifications such as Accountable Talk prompts and flashcards are present and available for EBs to refer to during class time. Small group instruction, group work, or independent work time enables EB students to interact with their peers and teachers in an authentic and meaningful way in the target language. Alternative assessment tools and materials are brought in to ensure that students are learning the content in these core classes as well. Visuals, pictures, video and audio are provided whenever possible, as are digital reading templates (such as ipads and laptops) so that students can access content material in their native language when desired. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At the beginning the the year new arrival students are issued and administered the Spanish Lab exam to yield data about their literacy proficiencies in Spanish. This data is referred to by their ELA, ENL and HLA teachers to ensure that instruction is organized and planned to best suit the needs of their students. Throughout the year in HLA students are tested in their native languages with a variety of assessment goals. We translate practice math assessments (such as the ANET exams mentioned above) into Spanish so that students may take the test in their native language if they so choose. And we utilize a variety of computer programs (such as Achieve 3000 mentioned above) that features texts and related assessments in a variety of different languages. When necessary we have translated exams into Bengali, Arabic, French or the other home languages spoken by our EB students, and therefore required throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) In our unit curriculum plans, teachers include differentiation and considerations for ELL students. In ELA, each of the final performance tasks are broken down further to include the work product expectations and scaffolds for ELLs in each of the 5 language proficiency levels. For SIFE students, we refer to the performance indicators and suggested standards to be accomplished by SIFE students in the appropriate content area. Teachers may plan the lesson around a particular literacy skill, such as identifying and describing the author's point of view. While many students in the class may receive a differentiated version of the text from the curriculum (chunked text, featuring bold faced words, a word bank, etc) SIFE students might be provided a different text entirely. The instruction for these students will be tailored to their specific desired outcomes and learning objectives. While they might also be focused on learning the same skill they might use a lower level text with similar text features, or a text in their native language to first learn the concept before transferring the skill to English. Instruction for these students considers a lack of academic skills, however also acknowledges high-cognitive ability - therefore "Hi interest-low level" texts and resources are often implemented as a form of differentiation for these students. b) Newcomer students are dealing with numerous social, emotional as well as academic factors. As teachers we try to take into consideration everything that these students are dealing with, so that we can make instruction time and time in the 9  classroom as positive and effective as possible. Modeling is crucial for most of our newcomers. The teacher models appropriate classroom behavior and uses positive framing to praise a student for positive behavior - also intended to serve as a model for newcomer students. Teachers push for consistency and routine as much as possible with these students, especially in the first few weeks and months so that they can become accustomed to classroom norms, and academic expectations. Lessons and activities for the first few weeks and months may involve more social-emotional consideration with regards to representing a students' personal identity, their family heritage etc, so that students feel comfortable, welcome and motivated to work when they are in school. Since other students may not need such a long welcoming transition, instruction and assignments are differentiated accordingly for our new arrival students. c) Developing ELLs may receive guided notes in class, a differentiated graphic organizer, or may simply have extra "HINT" cards throughout a lesson or activity. Depending on a particular student's strengths or weaknesses, teachers can target instruction accordingly. For example, for developing students who still struggle wth listening comprehension or speaking, they might benefit from some independent time on computer program that allows the student to listen to and respond to authentic English being spoken. Where as some developing ELLs may benefit from more writing or reading focused activities. This may mean a cloze activity for writing, or a reading conference or shared reading activity. d) The majority of our long term ELLs do not struggle with speaking or listening tasks, however their struggles lie primarily in reading and writing. For these ELLs teachers often differentiate text, by chunking text, bold facing key words, underlining key concepts or providing a word bank and list of comprehension strategies for reading tasks. Sentence starters, model sentences and example paragraphs are used as scaffolds for writing tasks. With these students in particular teachers pay close attention to reading and writing formal and informal assessment results so that teacher's can address recurrent errors before they become fossilized. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? With all of our ELL students (regardless of program type) and SWD students co teaching is present in all core classes. This enables small group instruction, small group work, as well as individual conferences. Guided notes are provided for students who struggle with writing tasks, or language proficiency in English. This enables students to focus on targeted aspects of content learning or targeted aspects of language learning throughout the lesson, as the teacher sees fit. Students are provided with visual models, sentence starters and relevant information whenever it may help the student accomplish the learning objective being addressed. All of our ELLs and SWDs use grade-level materials in their classes. Some supplementary texts may be utilized to support understanding of concepts and key ideas, which often means using a lower level text, so that the language is more approachable for these students and allowing them to focus primarily on the desired content. Teachers who specialize in teaching ELLs and SWDs modify the grade level curricula to accommodate the learning needs of these students. This may include tactile , visual or physical considerations for how the students will interact with the content during a lesson. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All of our ELLs with disabilities are in classes/programs that are co-taught. Students in these classes receive considerable amount of individual attention from their teachers during instruction. Co-teaching models, such as parallel teaching, station teaching and/or alternative teaching are used in the classroom to address the language learning needs of each of these students. Similarly their teachers consult the ENL department before making language accommodations for their students. ELLs with disabilities are placed in classes according to the requirements of their IEP, so whenever possible we place these students in an ICT class, so that there is as little restriction as possible. If a student's IEP indicates that they require a small-group setting, the student is placed in a self- contained class. For these students, push-in services are provided for language support, and when available a Spanish speaking paraprofessional works with that class to provide additional language support when needed. IEP meetings are held annually to update and check in on our SWDs' progress. During these meetings adjustments are made to their IEP goals as they are met and discussed with teachers, student and parents. Language proficiency is assessed using a variety of methods throughout different core classes. As students' proficiencies in English progress, these results are discussed with a teacher in a conference setting and new language goals are established. 0  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Each grade contains a dual language class, where students are provided math instruction in Spanish, push in language and ENL support in both social studies and science. The ENL team provides supports such as modified graphic organizers (with visuals to accommodate EBs) visuals and relevant language charts in appropriate rooms to facilitate learning during potential periods when push in support is unavailable. These types of supports also allow students the opportunity to work independently during class time. For our students who are not Spanish speaking EBs. Additionally all of their core subjects are co-taught. These students benefit from small group instruction or extra teacher attention at all times in these classes. These teachers consult with the ENL team to develop lessons, activities, and seek advice for how best to meet the needs of these particular students on a regular basis. The school also offers an after school ELL academy 5 days a week for ELLs. Teachers from all of the core content areas as well as ESL teachers are available each day to offer extra help and support. Several of our teachers are trained in Wilson, and they are also provide phonics language support to our most beginning students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Data shows that each year, the number of ELL students (particularly newcomers) increases from the previous year. In order accommodate this need, there are a couple of new initiatives and improvements that we plan on implementing for the upcoming school year. We will implement a full scale AIS program, with 2 teachers dedicating a significant portion of their teaching schedule to providing supplemental instruction to students who are below a certain level in Math and ELA. For our ELLs (and other students with significant reading deficiencies) who need instruction on phonics, the AIS provider will provide Wilson instruction. In addition, all of our existing unit plans across all content areas are being revamped in order to include specific scaffolds and work product expectations for ELLs in each of the 5 language proficiency levels. Using the resources and information that we've received from multiple PDs on ELL instruction, teachers will have a clear expectation of what each ELL in the different levels should be able to complete in their final performance tasks. Finally, we plan on continuing the after school ELL program but with differentiated groups by level so that instruction can be more tailored to the needs of students. Students in the lowest proficiency group will receive Wilson instruction while others may work on computer programs or workbooks that meet their language needs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? not applicable 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Over the course of their three years at Liberty ELL students will have received all necessary hours across content areas, as well as a variety of elective class options. ELLs are also encouraged to join our after school program, which features Learning Lab everyday as well as a variety of extracurricular activities to choose from, such as drama, art, dance, photography, Capoera, and more. We ensure that ELLs and their families are made aware of every school event, or school-wide initiative, by translating flyers, invitations and posters as well as any other administrative documents that get sent home. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs have access to all texts and other materials included in our curricula sets. They also receive supplementary texts, and materials such as graphic organizers, glossary lists, picture dictionaries, and any other modification to regular materials that their teachers see fit. Several of our textbooks are available in Spanish, and teachers use translation services for other languages such as Arabic. In terms of technology our school currently uses several resources. Rosetta stone is used as a computer program (generally used on desktop computers in the classroom), where students are able to practice all four modalities of English independently as they are supported by the computer program. Our school also uses a computer program called Achieve3000 that features leveled texts (specified to meet the needs of each individual student) across content areas. This program offers leveled texts in a variety of languages and ELLs use this program in their core classes, usually on laptops. ELLs also have access to iPads where they are able to use a variety of guided reading programs, translation applications, and academic games focused in with language acquisition and math. Finally ELLs have audio equipment, such as books on tape, books on CD, and recorded stories, so that they may listen to authentic texts in English during instruction. 1  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the dual language program students' home language (Spanish) is supported through primary instruction in Spanish in math, additional Spanish support in other content areas (Social Studies, Science and ELA/ENL). Additionally, the students in a dual language program receive Home Language Arts between 4-6 times a week (depending on grade) where students are supporting their English proficiency through strengthening their proficiency in their native language. The HLA curriculum follows the themes from Social Studies and ELA, so that similar concepts are reinforced in the home language. In the Stand-alone ENL program students' home languages (various) are supported through use of texts in their native languages, as well as "front loading" the lesson with the content expressed in the student's first language. Articles and texts are translated when necessary, otherwise teachers look for authentic materials in the native languages of our students in these programs. Student tasks are differentiated and supports are provided according to the NYS Bilingual Progressions. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our ENL department is well versed in the principles of Multicultural Education, which requires that teachers, the classroom environment and curriculum be culturally responsive as well as culturally sensitive and applicable to our students' ages and levels. Our ELLs may have "low" levels of proficiency, however we still need to make sure that the content is grade appropriate and stimulating. So high-interest books, with lower literacy levels are used routinely throughout ELL instruction. ELL teachers use a mixture of grade level texts, and supplementary texts and materials to address the specific needs of our students dependant upon their age and grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are co-located with another DOE middle school that has a similar ELL population. We share expertise for intake procedures, and we share professional learning opportunities in order to capitalize on our both schools' internal strengths. Both schools have social emotional components of their daily schedules and we use best practices from both schools to improve our practices. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We offer a few orientation nights at the beginning of the year to encourage ELLs among other students, to come meet the administration, get familiar with the building, and start preparing for the school year. These orientation nights are led by our ENL teachers, our guidance counselor and parent coordinator. We also host a series of "family nights" at the beginning of the year to encourage families and students to come and meet the staff, become familiar with the school and its personnel. We host these events throughout the year as we have a constant flow of beginner ELLs enrolling. Our after-school program (popular among our ELL population) also features a summer camp open to incoming 6th 7th and 8th grade students. This summer experience teaches students necessary social skills, and fosters an authentic language learning experience without the presence of rigorous classroom content. Students who participate in this program begin school more socially and emotionally prepared to take on the academic demands of the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are several electives offered at our school, such as book club, multicultural club, debate club, robotics, as well as sports teams. In the majority of these clubs, language is a major focus of the agenda. ELLs gain additional access to text, text features, varieties of conversational English, all included within an academically centered, social spaces. Electives such as debate provide ELLs with profound opportunity to interact with language as they prepare speeches, arguments, and learn the nuanced differences present within the different registers of English. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. 2  c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a) We use a self-contained model in our Dual Language program where ELLs and EPs are in the same Dual Language class, and spend approximately 70% of their time as an integrated class. The only times that the ELLs are taught in a separate environment is when they are pulled out for Stand Alone ENL to support their English proficiency. As the students' proficiencies improve throughout the year they spend more time in their core ELA classroom with their EP peers, and less time in a stand-alone ENL class. For most students this percentage drops to as low 20 or even 10%, where students are only pulled out for one or two periods of ENL classes per week by the end of the year. b) As mentioned above in our Dual Language programs Math is taught primarily in Spanish in each grade. The Dual language class receives language (Spanish) support in Social Studies and Science, where each of those classes are primarily taught in English. ELA is the only class where students are separated and instruction is conducted in two separate rooms, and thus potentially in different languages at different times. Native Language Arts is taught solely in Spanish. c)When possible the native language is used to "front load" concepts and information. So students might have their mini lesson in their native language while first expressing the learning objective or concept for that lesson. Once the initial concept has been introduced, instruction following allows students the opportunity to practice using English (across modalities), however whenever possible (or necessary) teachers may switch back to the native language to clarify questions or misconceptions. Often a question may be posed in English and yet students respond in Spanish, or similarly a worksheet or activity might be presented in English and while students are processing the English input, they produce in their native language. This pattern is prominent among EB students, and is a sign of progress and competence. d) Literacy instruction varies student by student, since literacy is such an individualized skill. When possible we teach students in their native language first, to build a strong skill-set base, before then applying those same learned skills to English. However very often students are still developing their skills in their native language when they begin learning English literacy, in which case we teach the student in both languages simultaneously. This is often the case between HLA class and ENL class. Students are working on the "same" skill in each class however they are reading both English and Spanish texts to develop that skill. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? As we have in years past we plan to invest ample hours in professional development workshops, trainings and seminars for our ENL department, so that knowledge from these sessions can be applied to their instruction as well as turn-keyed back to the rest of the Liberty staff who are content teachers that instruct ELLs. We are currently looking for opportunities specific to teaching literacy for ELLs, teaching SIFE students, and how to teach content through language and language through content. Each of the ENL department members will attend a minimum of two PDs this year, and they plan to lead at least 3 PDs for the rest of the staff before NYSESLAT testing begins in the spring. All ENL department members meet with a representative from Generation Ready bi-monthly to discuss instruction methods, 3  planning for future instruction as well as how to incorporate scaffolds and resources into instruction in a meaningful way. Any teachers who teach ELLs are able to meet with this consultant to discuss questions and concerns, and any PD opportunities (specifically about working with ELLs or how to accommodate ELLs in your classroom) are forwarded to any teachers who teach ELLs as well. The ENL department will be leading a series of 3 PDs for the whole staff before NYSESLAT testing begins in the spring. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school works with an organization of social workers, Partnership with Children, who are able to meet with children both individually and in group counseling sessions (with parent consent). During two days of whole-staff PD before students arrive at the beginning of the year, teachers are provided with the appropriate contacts in the school, such as Partnership with Children (who have Spanish speaking representatives, our guidance counselor (who also speaks fluent Spanish), and various other school aids who can provide support when needed such as Deans, and members of Administration. The ENL team has also made ourselves available to any staff members who have questions or concerns about working with ELLs . As a PROSE school this year we have been able to tweak our weekly schedule in such a way that all of our staff professional development time is allocated for Wednesday afternoons. Students leave after 6 periods of instruction and teachers remain for the rest of the day for Professional Development sessions. The ENL department often has specialized PD session targeted just for our group, many which have been on site, however our nearby Network headquarters hosted most of the PD session in years previous. Therefore 50% of the PD hours for Bilingual/ENL teachers required by Part 154. The ENL department leads PDs for the whole staff monthly , and the consultants from Generation Ready will lead as many as 5 separate PDs throughout the year, all which will accommodate the more than the required 15% for other teachers. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We discuss goals for both our Dual Language program as well as our stand-alone ENL classes with parents at the Parent Orientation night we host at the beginning of the year in September. All parents of ELLs were invited, and for those that do not attend we send home an information packet and letter so that they could read about the goals and expectations of each program offered by our school and this letter invites them to schedule a time to come in and meet about goals. The ENL team tries to personally call every parent to invite them to every Parent-Teacher conference, so that we can discuss their individual student's progress and have a chance to answer questions regarding our program itself and its goals. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Liberty has a Parent Outreach team whose goal it is to increase parent involvement and invite parents into the building and keep parents informed about what's happening at the school. In September we host an open school night inviting parents to the school. Parents are invited and encouraged to attend in order to visit the building, meet teachers and staff and find out about the different programs we offer. Numerous ELL families are in attendance, as we send the invitation in English and Spanish, and have multiple translators on hand. The parent coordinator holds English classes for parents who are interested in learning English, as well as events and informational workshops for that would particularly interest ELL parents. These events and workshops include Nutritional Classes, Summer Enrichment Workshop, Mommy and Me, CPR classes, free mammogram events, and information sessions on immigration rights. The ENL department is also provides an after school ENL opportunity for parents and children to attend classes together. The goal is to include parents in their child's education, as well as provide the parent with means to learn the language as well. This will foster a healthy relationship between teachers, parents and students. We hope this also helps ELLs establish good habits 4  when it comes to academics, such as completing homework assignments, reading with family members at home, and conferring with parents about school work and assignments. ELL parents are invited to join the School Leadership Team, they are invited to chaperon school functions or trips, and are otherwise invited to attend any other school-sponsored event. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kaia Nordtvedt, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Liberty Avenue Middle School School DBN: 19K662 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Kaia Nordtvedt Title Principal Jennifer Ryglaksi Assistant Principal Suheilee Vazquez Parent Coordinator Lauryn Crowe ENL/Bilingual Teacher Magdelina Nieto Parent Laura Morel Nancy Suazo NA NA Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Aleira Rosa School Counselor Dr. Thomas McBryde Jr. Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 19K662 School Name: Liberty Avenue Middle School Superintendent: Stallings-Hart The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess language preferences of parents, we ask all parents to fill out Emergency Contact Cards (Blue Cards) and ask parents to specify the language of communication for the adults listed. In addition, we look at the ELL proficiceny levels in order to find out which students need translation services by our teachers. We use home language surveys and our school intake interviews to find out which families will need translation services for workshops, parent-teacher conferences, and other school events. The majority of our families speak Spanish and we have a bilingual Guidance Counselor, bilingual Psychologist, bilingual Parent Coordinator, and numerous bilingual staff members. We use the home language survey to help us understand what translation and interpretation needs we have in our buidling. My secretary also runs the UPPG report in ATS to confirm. This year we have approximately 150 Spanish speaking parents who need translation and 2 sets of parents that need Arabic translation. 8  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Bengali Arabic Nepali 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Cell Phone Policy Letter Parent Orientation Parent-Teacher Conference reminders Bring Your Dad to School Day Field trip permission slips Monthly Calendar 9  Newsletters After-school program information Lunch forms Special School events (Talent Show, Spelling Bee, Student activities) 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Open School Night - September 16, 2015 Parent-teacher conferences - 3 times a year Dual Language Option Night - September 30 th SLT meetings - Once a month IEP meetings - annual reviews according to due dates 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 0  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We have provided our enrollment information, our school safety and discipline information and all revelant fliers in translated form due to our heavy population of Spanish speaking families and we will continue to do so. Whenever possible, we provide translation into Bengali for our Bengali family and into Arabic for our Arabic speaking families. Teachers have called into the Translation service as necessary. Our parent coordiator is aware of A-663 and has informed all parents of their right to translation and interpretation. We have bilingual staff members for parent translation in Spanish for all school and parental events. We have the Arabic speaking family either call translation services at DOE offices or they have brought a family member to translate for them. All signs are posted in main office and main hallway that indicate the availability of translation services. Our Benglai family usually says they are fine with translation on their own as they are learning English but we also have the translation services number ready for them as well. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Every year, we ask our parents to fill out the parent surveys in their home languages. To ensure that we get the highest rate of completion, we provide opportunities for parents during open school night (parent teacher conferences) to fill out the paper or electronic form. We also encourage parents to reach out to our parent coordinator if they have questions and concerns. Parents who volunteer to be part of the SLT also have opportunities to provide feedback and help make some school wide decisions. Parents also have access to Skedula via Pupilpath where they have access to up-to-date information about their child's acaedemic progress and can message teachers directly if they choose. 1 
