 19K663 School Name: SCHOOL OF THE FUTURE BROOKLYN Principal: ROBERT BURNSIDE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School of the Future Brooklyn 19K663 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 331900010663 6-8 574 Dumont Avenue 718-345-5190 School Number (DBN): 718-345-5196 Fax: Robert L. Burnside rburnside@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 19 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Robert L. Burnside Adam Lammers Keith Logan Alyson Lopez Tanya Mars N/A N/A CristinStrining District Information Dr. Thomas McBryde Superintendent: 557 Pennsylvania Avenue tmcbryde@schoosl.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-240-2741 Phone Number: 718-240-2747 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street room 501 BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-3444 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Robert L. Burnisde Adam Lammers Keith Logan Tanya Mars N/A N/A CristinStrining Alyson Lopez Shivaun Rozgiers KrystinaVazquez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/UFT Member/ Parent Member/Parent   Name Shakeia Young-Rucker Robert Freeman Simona Sampson-Gaymon Nancy Rodriguez Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/UFT Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? School of The Future is a college preparatory school that provides each scholar with a diverse education in a safe, nurturing environment which promotes self-discipline, independence, citizenship, motivation and excellence in order to contribute responsibly to the global society and improve the quality of life for self and others.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We currently serve students on the border of East New York and Brownsville in grades 6, 7, and 8. In order to meet this vision our community is aligned so that teachers are continually involved in structures to improve professional practice, as well as reflect on and increase student achievement. Our teacher teams are structured in grade level teams and academic departments. Grade teams are facilitated by grade-team leaders, who meet weekly with administration, and focus on student inquiry, teacher practice, and grade-level systems to ensure that our school’s mission and vision are attending to grade-level needs for each student. In academic departments teachers work collaboratively to plan curricula, common assessments, and align instructional decisions to meet the needs of all students. Teachers use inquiry protocols to analyze practice, student work, and assessment data. Teachers also work in co-planning pairs to differentiate instruction on a weekly basis.. In order to support all students in achieving at high levels, we rely on the following programs and partnerships so that each student is both academically and emotional supported throughout their middle school career.  Academic Coaching: 160 minutes a week are programmed for one-on-one academic coaching. Each week students meet one-on-one with their coach in order set goals and reflect on their academic progress. All coaching conversations are student-directed and are non-evaluative. The goal of coaching conversations is to give students an opportunity to set and reflect on their goals and strategies, as well as support students' abilities to build relationships with adults. This work is supported by our partnership with Big Picture Learning, and is a direct extension of our instructional model.  Advisory: Our student population comes to us with many challenges. We serve a population that requires a number of social-emotional supports in order to actively participate in our academic program. In order to support students, we balance the academic learning with multiple opportunities for character development, interpersonal skill building, and team building. Advisory groups participate in whole group projects which build upon their collaborative skills. The advisor/advisee relationship significantly increases students’ feelings of belonging and trust. This work is supported by our partnerships with Big Picture Learning as well as Partnership for Children, a comprehensive social work organization that supports students and families in and outside of our school as needed.  Restorative Practices to address student behavior which does not align with school’s expectations. Students have a voice in conversations around problem solving and conflict resolution. Students request peer mediation and also use safe spaces in school to check their emotions..  Arts and Electives: Our students have the opportunity to work with a number of teaching artists during and after school. We offer music, dance, performance arts through partnerships with Young Voices Big Sounds.  New York Edge, After school Program: The goal is to have over 80% of our students enrolled and participating in the comprehensive after school programming. Students participate in athletics, arts, academic support and academic enrichment from 3-6pm Monday-Tuesday, Thursday-Friday and 1-4pm Wednesday.  New Teacher Center Mentoring Project: Supports and trains teacher mentors to work with early career teachers through the use of collaborative tools for reflection.  Big Picture Learning: Provides on-site consultant to work with administration on strategic planning and professional development in particular around project-based learning, advisory curricula, academic coaching and school-wide systems and implementation  Middle School Quality Initiative: Provides on site coaching and data support for all of our teachers in developing and implementing a school-wide literacy model, in particular focusing on aligning literacy in the content areas of Science and History. Learning Partners Program: Allows us to collaborate with like-minded schools in order to develop and support professional development, teacher leadership, and student achievement   Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project: Provides on and off site curriculum support and development for teachers and administrative and strategic planning support. 0   PROSE: Provides strategic partnerships and collaborations to support our implementations and innovations as a school community, in particular in the areas of teacher observation, distributive leadership, and personalized learning. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Of our 194 students 56 students have IEPs and 21 are ENLs. Our percentage of students in temporary housing fluctuates between 10-25% throughout the year. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to feedback we have received from Principal Performance Observations and our School Quality Review, our school has strong foundations in curriculum, teacher teams, and goal setting. There is consistency in the development of teacher practice and school-leaders and teachers work together to set goals for individual and school-wide instructional practice. Through our distributive leadership model we are able to make and reflect upon school-wide decisions in order to meet our goals, as well as make plans for future work. Our goals this year are focused on areas of growth as evidenced by our Framework report, the Principal Performance Observation process, and our most recent School Quality Review. In order to respond to our teacher's needs, we will provide targeted professional development on the implementation of Professional Learning Community (PLC), designing task that will provide students with multiple entry points, creating consistent rigorous task that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standard (CCLS). Rooted in authentic/real-life data-driven instruction, interventions, and task that will sensitively infuse culturally relevant, social, and emotional learning. To support the work on designing rigorous task that support the CCLS, we will focus on the quality of student work through inquiry cycles by looking at performance tasks, exemplars, and student work. Introducing Mandarin as a Foreign Language will prepare our students to excel in a global society. We will also work with strengthening our family and community ties. In particular, our shared decision making, outreach, and workshops through the use of the Remind messaging system, soliciting parent volunteers, inviting parents into the classroom, and utilizing parent feedback to design workshops and school-wide events. "In order to respond to our teacher's needs, we will provide teachers with high-quality professional development in order to support raising student achievement on state and school-based assessments. In order to improve in our feedback in the area of Supportive Environment, we will be focusing on supporting students' classroom behavior through a further development of restorative practices including training staff in community and restorative circles. In order to continue our work in Rigorous Instruction we will be focusing on the the quality of student work through the use of performance tasks and student work analysis through inquiry cycles. We will also be working to support our family and community ties, in particular in our shared decision making, outreach, and workshops" 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K663 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 201 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 5 2 6 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 5 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 89.6% % Reduced Lunch 10.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 30.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.25 0% 57% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 11.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 46 46 5 89.9% 3.0% 25.9% 65.7% 1.5% 1.0% 0 79% 4 3.9% 5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on feedback from our School Quality Review, the PPO process, and our 2018 Framework for Great Schools Report, we have demonstrated many strengths in the area of Rigorous Instruction. Our SQR rated us Well Developed in the category of curriculum and instruction, allowing our school to continually score high in the alignment of our curriculum to the CCLS. In order to continue to support teachers in developing and implementing rigorous curriculum our school partners with the following organizations: Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project, Urban Advantage, the Middle School Quality Initiative, Math in the City, and Math for America. Our next steps as a school community focus on the use of data to inform instruction in particular in accelerating the learning for student sub-groups, as evidenced by improved performance in state and local assessments. We have received feedback in both of these categories from our Framework report, the PPO process, and from our School Quality Review. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, School of the Future Brooklyn teachers will design and implement differentiated, rigorous tasks, as the result of collecting data in the moment, that will result in 20% increase of student performance on or above grade level on quarterly report cards, and NYS ELA and Math Assessments. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School-wide implementation of assessment analysis inquiry cycles in order to ensure that all tasks are aligned to standards and that instructional plans are modified to support student achievement. administration, teachers, teacher-leaders, paraprofessionals August-Sept 2018 Internal review of 2016 student performance data teachers, teacher leaders, staff development consultants, administration Oct-Dec: Inquiry cycle 1 Dec-Jan: Mid-year assessment administration Feb-April 2019 Inquiry cycle 2 May-June 2019: End of year assessments and data protocols Review of student data by the 4  leadership team 11 days of professional development support from TCRWP beginning in September 2018 and continuing through June 2019 10 days of MIITC support beginning in September 2018 and continuing through June 2019 Use of CCLS aligned assessments for baseline, mid-year, and end of year progress monitoring teachers, teacher-leaders, paraprofessionals September 2018: baseline assessment administration and data analysis teachers, department leaders, staff developers (TCRWP, MSQI, UA, MIIC, MSQI), administration October: leadership team review of all baseline data 5  Parent workshops and outreach to support improved literacy and math skills, work habits, and homework. parents and caregivers Dec-January 2019: Mid-year assessment and data analysis January-Feb: Leadership team review of mid-year data May-June 2019: End of year assessment and data analysis June: Leadership team end of year data At least 2/3 meeting between October and December of 2018. At least 2 meetings between January and March of 2019 Parent Coordinator, Parent Association, Administration, , Community Coordinator Leadership team progress monitoring and adjusting school-wide plans as needed August-June 2019 Bi-weekly meetings Teacher leaders, administration 6  MAKE SURE TO MOVE THE ACTIVITIES OVER TO THIS SECTION Quarterly CEP progress monitoring meetings Review of and necessary adjustment to school-wide professional development plans through the use of protocols and inquiry cycles 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent coordinator, grade team leaders, community coordinator will develop workshops to support parents' and caregivers' understanding of student assessment data and ways to improve student academic performance. Workshops will include supporting your student with literacy, math, and other school/study habits. CURRICULUM NIGHT SURVEY PARENTS BACK TO SCHOOL NIGHT Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title 1 funds allocated to support contract with Teachers College Reading and Writing Project and Math In the City to develop and implement instructional strategies to support all learners. Tax Levy funds and NYSTL funds curriculum materials, per session, and release days to support professional development activities and implementation of goals. Tax Levy funds allocated to support contract with Big Picture Learning to develop and support team practices around talk and assessment, in particular to support students in academic coaching as well as support administration in school-wide planning. Tax Levy funds and New School OTPS funds allocated to purchase technology and curricula supports for teachers. MSQI grant funds used to support cross-curricular planning materials, per session, and release time for staff development. Learning Partners grants in supporting inquiry cycles, per session, and teacher collaboration Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other 7  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February: -Initial and mid-year assessment data analyzed by teacher teams and leadership teams with goal of a minimum of 5% growth from baseline assessments -Notes and documents from initial inquiry cycle by department teams including action plans, student work products, and tracking systems -Action plans created to address gaps and special sub-groups of students who have not yet met 5% progress towards goals -Progress analysis of goals established in the first quarter created for students in special sub-groups (SWD's, ENL's, Students in temp housing) to plan, monitor, and/or revise for goal attainment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Improvement in student academic performance as evidenced by data protocols, outcomes on student assessments. Improvement in teacher practice in domains 1e, 3c, and 3d as evidenced by Advance. Review of minutes from academic department meetings, staff developer meetings, and leadership team meetings to look for trends and direct impact on instruction. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As a small school we have worked hard to develop and sustain positive school culture that is oriented towards academic achievement, while still holding students to high standards of behavior. In order to support students our teacher leaders developed a school-wide system to respond to student misbehavior and support our school's implementation of restorative practices. In developing this goal we considered data from our social work and guidance referrals, our OORS reports, suspension reports, and our Framework for Great Schools report. These data demonstrate that we have made progress in our personal attention and support, and have provided social-emotional supports for students we need to focus on supporting classroom behaviors. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, School of the Future Brooklyn scholars’ social and emotional development will be further strengthened through structured morning meetings, a series of relevant social-emotional and cultural learning activities, focused on peer to peer support and culturally responsive teaching that will result in a decrease of classroom removals and suspensions by 50% (OORS reporting) and lead to an increase of scholars’ engagement by 20% by utilizing Restorative Practices. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Alignment of professional learning activities including, but not limited to: teachers, paraprofessionals, support staff August 2018-June 2019 Administration, CBO partnerships, teacher leaders     restorative practices and positive community building circles adolescent development and trauma school-wide positive behavior interventions academic coaching and advisory curriculum review and refinement. Expansion of CBO support and school-based support staff.    addition of a full time guidance social worker increased at-risk, individual, and group counseling sessions refining of crisis and behavior plans as needed. BUILDING COMPACITY OF ALL STAFF MEMBERS TO TAKE OWNERSHIP OF ESTABLISHING SUPPORTIVE CLASSROOM ENVIRONMENT Addition of supports in behavior management from outside staff developers, including staff training in restorative practices PROACTIVE APPROACHES ESTABLISHING POSITIVE CLASSROOM CULTURE Parent outreach and supports to include, but are not limited to:   Family Handbook that outlines behavior and discipline policy September "Back to School Dinner" to include information for families on behavior systems, supports, and positive interventions teaching staff, student support staff August 2018-June 2019 Administration, CBO partnerships, teacher leaders Community Coordinator, CBO staff, student support staff August 2018-June 2019 Administration, CBO partnerships, teacher leaders, community coordinator parents, caregivers, students September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Community Coordinator, CBO staff, administration, teachers 0  November parent event to include information on supports for students and families within and outside of school during the holiday season  Ongoing workshops on adolescent development 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to engage families grade team leaders, community coordinator, social worker, and parent coordinator will develop a calendar of events in order to support positive behavior and habits in school. HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE FALL; LIST THEM HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE WINTER: LIST THEM As needed parent coordinator will conduct home visits, family meetings, and connect families towards resources that can help support students. PC WILL ELICIT FEEDBACK FROM TEACHERS TO SCHEDULE PARENT MEETINGS ONCE A WEEK DURING PARENT ENGAGEMENT HOUR. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax levy and Title 1 funding is allocated to support contracts with Big Picture Learning to support academic coaching, advisory, and restorative practices. Tax Levy and Title 1 funding is allocated to support contracts with Partnership with Children to support parent engagement as well as students and families in and outside of school. Tax levy funds are allocated to fund the Community Coordinator position. Central funding allocated to support a full time guidance counselor. Title IV - Well Rounded Spending Plan:  College and Career Counseling    Music and Arts Social Emotional Learning STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 1  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administrative team and school support staff will review initial data from OORS at the following intervals: November 2018 February 2019 April 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Internal data systems, OORs reporting systems, comparative analysis with BFSC and district support team Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on feedback from our School Quality Review and our Framework for Great Schools Report one area of growth for our school is the alignment of curricula and assessments in order to impact student learning. In our development as a school we worked during the 2015-2016 school year to develop a school-wide assessment framework, and were successful in our practice of using benchmark assessments on a macro level. During the 2016-2017 school year we were successful in implementing three rounds of student data protocols that were used to adjust student groupings and interventions. Based on feedback from our PPOs we are consistently performing well in peer collaboration, innovation, and collective responsibility. In order to continue to develop our schools practice in teacher collaboration we are now ready to focus on using unit and lesson data to inform day to day instructional choices, in particular for our SWD and ELL students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, School of the Future Brooklyn teachers will utilize a PLC protocol to analyze the performance task of our scholars in order to recognize their individual needs and plan lessons that support differentiated instruction as measured by Action Plan data: scholar work samples, agendas and minutes, development of lesson plans and observations. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Alignment of professional learning activities including but not limited to:  Weekly meetings with department leaders and grade team leaders to design and develop professional development activities as aligned towards goal  Departmental data reviews and action plans to be done at the beginning, middle and end of the school year  Assessment plans submitted by department for administrative review  Teacher observations to focus on domain 3D: Using Data    to Plan Instruction Leadership team will review and analyze school-wide data for trends, with the lens of SWDs, ELLs, and other subgroups SIT team to focus year-long work on assessments and data in Math and ELA Increased supports from consultants to target differentiation in order to create multiple entry points for all student subgroups Expansion of professional development supports for teacher practice to include BFSC, MSQI, Math In the City, TCRWP, and Big Picture Learning Teacher-led parent workshops to include, but are not limited to:  Understanding IEPs and the transition to middle school  Supporting your child's reading and understanding reading levels ]How to support your child in math   Helping your middle school student with homework  Understanding and helping your student prepare for the Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? teachers and teacher teams August 2018-June 2019 Administration, teachers, teacher leaders, CBO partners teacher teams, teacher leaders August 2018-June 2019 Administration, teacher leaders, CBO partnerships teachers, parents and caregivers October 2018-March 2019 administration, teacher leaders, professional development consultants state exams 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Grade team leaders, parent coordinator, and student support staff will collaborate to design and implement parent workshops and events to communicate and support students literacy and mathematics skills at home, as well as informing families about their students' progress towards grade-level benchmarks. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title 1 funds allocated to support contract with Teachers College Reading and Writing Project and Math In the City to develop and implement strategies across curricula in the use of common rubrics and assessment tools. Partnership with MSQI to support instruction and planning across content areas. Tax Levy funds and NYSTL funds used to purchase Jupiter Ed to house student assessment data. Time allocated through the school wide program and professional development to review student data and inform instructional decisions, in particular around performance tasks. Tax Levy funds allocated to support contract with Big Picture Learning to develop and support team practices around data and assessment, in particular to support students in academic coaching as well as support administration in school-wide planning. Tax Levy funds allocated to purchase technology and curricula supports for teachers. Per-session allocated for staff to develop assessments in the content areas. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January 2019 academic departments (Humanities, Math/Science, and Special Education) will submit mid year data and action plans to leadership team for review. February 2019 planning and support documents from TCRWP, MIITC, and MSQI will be reviewed for evidence of progress towards goals February 2019: Leadership team review of student performance data and adjustment of professional development plans as needed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher observation focusing on domain 3D in the Danielson Framework. Use of research-based assessment and planning tools in partnership with BSFC and CBO supports 5  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The feedback from our School Quality Review, the PPO process, and our Framework for Great Schools report indicate that this is an area of strength in our school community. In areas around instructional support and program coherence we demonstrate our greatest strengths. In our school's development we have used our membership to PROSE to create a new framework for decision making that would allow for greater teacher influence and voice. As a result teachers volunteered to develop a distributive leadership model, including new staffing positions, to address the needs of our community and allow for greater teacher influence and voice as aligned with our school's mission, vision, and values. For the 2018-2019 school year our goal is to refine and improve our shared decision making process to become more responsive to school-wide needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the School of the Future Brooklyn administration will create, implement and monitor a professional development plan that builds the teachers’ capacity to design and implement differentiated instructional strategies to meet the variety of learners’ needs, which will result in 10% improvement in components 1E in Advance. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Expansion of participation in PROSE to include professional activities focused on distributive leadership. Bi-monthly leadership meetings as developed through leadership framework. Implementation of teacher-led committee work to expand leadership opportunities and distribute school-wide decision makine Continuation of CBO supports for leadership coaching and strategic planning Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher leaders, support staff, administration August 2018-June 2019 Teacher leaders, administration August 2018-June 2019 Administration, teacher leaders, school leadership team members, CBO partnerships Administration, teacher leaders, support staff, CBO partnerships teachers, teacher leaders, administration September 2018-June 2019 Adminstration, teacher leaders, support staff Administration, CBO partnerships August 2018-June 2019 Administration, CBO partnerhsips Development of grade-level parent leaders who will participate monthly in leadership planning meetings to support parent leadership development and participation in shared decision making process Teacher leaders, Parent leaders, administraion September 2018-June 2019 Administration, teacher leaders, parent leaders, parent coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent coordinator, community coordinator, and leadership team members will develop and support grade-level parent leadership through volunteer assignments, event planning, and increased communication. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy funds allocated to support contract with Big Picture Learning to develop and support leadership practices and strategic planning. Grant funds through PROSE program to support per session activities and professional 8  development. Tax Levy funds allocated for per-session for staff to participate and implement decision making framework. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January 2019 staff survey of leadership team work and committee work, February 2019 leadership team review of survey data and subsequent action planning May-June end o f year team reflection and revision for 2018-2019 school year, focusing on implementation of mid-year reflection and progress towards goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey data as collected in the 2018 Framework for Great Schools report. Internal survey and review process as part of mid-year and end of year team reflections. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a school community we know the importance of ensuring that our school is a welcoming an supportive environment for students and for parents. As parents transition from elementary school to middle school there are new expectations for students and families in terms of academic support and student independence. In order to support this transition all students' families meet with their student's academic coach. This person stays consistent throughout each students' middle school career so that families and students are able to develop a lasting relationship. As a result of this structure we are able to demonstrate over 80% attendance school-wide in parent-teacher conferences, and communication between school and home remains consistent. As a school community, we know that parent-teacher conferences are not enough to truly engage parents in partnership with school. This goal was developed to support more active engagement and involvement in our school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, School of the Future Brooklyn will increase opportunities for parent involvement in school activities by 30% through the creation of parent-scholar activities based on the academic and social-emotional needs of the scholars, school community and parental response to interest surveys. (e.g. IEP workshops, Understanding Teenagers, Homework help for every unit in each subject, etc.). 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Refinement of community coordinator's role student support staff August 2018-June 2019 Professional development and support for parent coordinator Parent coordinator, student support, adminsitration Continuation of CBO partnerships to support family engagement, outreach, attendance, translation services, and supports fro families of students with IEPs. CBO partnerships, Student support staff, administration weekly meetings beginning September 2018 Monthly meetings between PC and administration to support programming and event coordinating July 2018-June2019 Parent Coordinator, Community Coordinator, CBO partnerships, Administration Parent coordinator, Director of student support, administration Parent Coordinator, CBO partnerships, Administration Implementation of distributive leadership framework to include all staff in supporting family engagement through the development of parent leaders. teacher leadership, administration August 2018-June 2019 Teacher leaders, administration Use of social media to communicate with families to increase parent awareness of events, in particular families of SWDs, ELLs, and parents, caregivers, students August 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Community Coordinator, CBO partners 1  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Big Picture Learning Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy funds allocated to support contract with Big Picture Learning to develop and support leadership practices and strategic planning. Grant funds through PROSE program to support per session activities and professional development. Tax Levy funds allocated for per-session for staff to participate and implement decision making framework. Tax Levy funds allocated to support Community Coordinator position. Tax levy and Title 1 funds allocated to support per session, supplies, and materials for events as needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. July 2018-September 2018 event planning and calendaring January 2019 minimum of two family workshops completed, and two workshops planned for spring semester Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey responses as indicated on the 2018 Framework for Great Schools report Event attendance data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) DRP and Running Record data NYS Math scores, internal assessment data Literacy and math assessment data, internal science assessment data Literacy assessment data, internal assessment data At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Observation and anecdotal data from teacher teams provided to PPT for review Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Guided Reading Small group School day Small group School day Small group School day Small group School day School day Small group counseling, one-to-one counseling, CBO counseling referrals Numeracy intervention Pre-teaching, non fiction reading support, supplemental materials and labs Non-fiction reading support, supplemental content support (video, higher levels of text differentiation, pre-teaching) and writing support Counseling services provided by guidance counselor and social workers provided by CBO partner Partnership With Children 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) On average approximately 20% of our students are in some form of temporary housing. At the lowest roughly 12 % of students are in temporary housing, at the highest we have had up to 30% of our students and families in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. In order to support our STH population funds are allocated to purchase supplies such as notebooks, pens, book bags, folders etc that are provided to students throughout the school year. To support students' and family's social-emotional needs our social work and guidance team identify and target students on the STH list throughout the year. These students and families receive support in the form or individual or group counseling, family support groups, resource management, and other supports as needed. Partnership with Children also provides holiday gifts and summer program supports for STH students. STH students are identified and are connected to SASF so that students are able to attend after school programming throughout the year, including possible Saturday and summer programs. 4 Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The majority of teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry-based professional collaborations. Distributed leadership structures are in place. Established inquiry-based collaborative practices promote the achievement of school goals, the implementation of Common Core Learning Standards, and strengthen the instructional capacity of teachers. Further, defined leadership structures enable teachers to have a voice in key decisions that promote improved pedagogy and shared leadership with a focus on improvement of student learning. Administration devised a schedule that ensures teachers meet for inquiry work weekly with both grade and content teams, plus a day of professional development, as well as common planning time during the week. The inquiry work includes using protocols to look at student work and assessments to promote the achievement of school goals. In a math and science team meeting, teachers reviewed sample student work to determine criteria for a learning progression, whereby criteria determine different levels of quality work. Teachers deliberated over potential barriers and solutions. In a discussion, teachers stated that they have grown professionally and collegiality from these collaborations. We draw upon our professional communities (Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, Urban Advantage, Math for America, Teach for America, New York City Teaching Fellows, and Big Picture Learning) in order to recruit and support teachers who are actively engaged in a rigorous professional practice. We use collaborative hiring practices so that teachers and students are invested in the selection of their colleagues and community members. We use mentoring, in-service professional development, outside professional development, and internal leadership opportunities to retain and support all staff members. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 6  Clear messaging and established systems of training and accountability ensure that staff understand expectations and are held accountable by administration. Students and families understand progress made toward goals due to the school’s ongoing and detailed feedback, enhancing guidance and advisement supports for the school stakeholders. School leaders communicate high expectations to staff through multiple venues including the staff handbook, emails, and professional development calendar. The administration holds staff accountable through a series of observation cycles that is based on their individual goals, teacher team meeting agendas and minutes from professional collaborative inquiry and provides next steps. The principal models the same coaching structure with teachers that teachers use with students. Additionally, the professional development calendar, which was developed, designed, and delivered by teacher leaders and coaches, started over the summer and is a living document, ensuring a constant adjustment to maintain alignment with the school goals, the Danielson Framework for Teaching and school initiatives. Teacher leaders rotate the facilitation of teacher team meetings, ensuring that several teachers develop distributed leadership skills. Grade team leaders meet weekly with the principal around inquiry and achievement of the school mission. Teachers are empowered with a voice in key decisions that affect students across the school. For example, teachers not only lead the professional collaborations in grade team and department meetings, but also meet weekly with the principal to plan and implement initiatives, such as power hour. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 7  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Clear messaging and established systems of training and accountability ensure that staff understand expectations and are held accountable by administration. Students and families understand progress made toward goals due to the school’s ongoing and detailed feedback, enhancing guidance and advisement supports for the school stakeholders. School leaders communicate high expectations to staff through multiple venues including the staff handbook, emails, and professional development calendar. The administration holds staff accountable through a series of observation cycles that is based on their individual goals, teacher team meeting agendas and minutes from professional collaborative inquiry and provides next steps. The principal models the same coaching structure with teachers that teachers use with students. Additionally, the professional development calendar, which was developed, designed, and delivered by teacher leaders and coaches, started over the summer and is a living document, ensuring a constant adjustment to maintain alignment with the school goals, the Danielson Framework for Teaching and school initiatives. Teacher leaders rotate the facilitation of teacher team meetings, ensuring that several teachers develop distributed leadership skills. Grade team leaders meet weekly with the principal around inquiry and achievement of the school mission. Teachers are empowered with a voice in key decisions that affect students across the school. For example, teachers not only lead the professional collaborations in grade team and department meetings, but also meet weekly with the principal to plan and implement initiatives, such as power hour. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 141,906.00 0 0 0 1,235,290.00 X 8 Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 9  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. School of the Future Brooklyn, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students School of the Future Brooklyn will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 1  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) School of the Future Brooklyn , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 3  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 4  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 5  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 6  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 19 School Name School of the Future Brooklyn Borough Brooklyn School Number 663 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Sarah Kauffman Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Nicole Cafaro Teacher/Subject Area M. Good Teacher/Subject Area R. Freeman Related-Service Provider R. Schubert Superintendent Joyce Stallings Harte Assistant Principal Coach type here School Counselor Ms. Grandison Parent Parent Coordinator J. Robinson Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 6 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) % D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) Total number of ELLs 8  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? School of the Future will assess students using Degrees of Reading Power three times during the school year, Teachers college Running records, teacher created assessments, student work, and other sources to evaluate each students reading level and comprehension ability. In addition, teachers use pre and post literacy assessments to evaluate comprehension and reading levels of students. This data will continue to drive differentiated instruction and help determine independent and guided reading levels. It will help our teachers to tailor individual learning plans, allow progress monitoring, and provide opportunity to adjust curriculum based on ELL students needs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? SOFBK follows a schedule each school year in order to ensure all assessments are completed at a pace that is condusive to effective analysis. Student scores and performance levels are gathered and made available to all staff. Various assessments are administered by classroom teachers and assessent teams throughout the year. Deadlines are included on the calendar to make 9 certain this data is immediately made available to all staff in order to be used for planning and designng instruction based on students needs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our ELLs complete the appropriate grade level New York City Peformance Task and a teacher created baseline assessment to provide data for student reading and comprehension levels. We use the NYSITELL for new students and NYSESLAT scores to further evaluate and determine student needs. These assessments are designed to inform educators with specific data about their students strenghts and needs in English language development. We also use the NT State ELA and MATH assessments, as well as unit level assessments. SOFBK uses the results of this assessment to guide us in planning individual, small group, and class instruction. To evaluate the success of our program for ELLs, we will closely monitor progress for all students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data is gathered educators work cooperatively to develop a plan to increase students language proficiency. These professionals work congruently to design individualized action plans for students in the integrated/classroom setting as well as in the freestanding ENL setting. By working cooperately, our teachers design a plan to address interventions based on the summative data to effectively increase student achievement. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] For students performing below grade level, we will use the Standard Treatment Protocol to determine if a student is in need of RTI. We will consider: -Students number of years in ESL program (newcomer or long term) -English and home language literacy -SIFE indications -Classroom or ESL teacher recommendations -Parent or guardian request -Sample of student work in English and L1 if possible -Bilingual education evaluation, is a disability is suspected -and data produced by F&P, SOLOM, NYSESLAT/NYSITELL NYS Periodic Assessments and regular assessments. This protocol is supported by a strong research base. After carefully analyzing this data, students will be provided with support in the appropriate RTI tiers. For students in Tier 1, Teachers will adjust the curriculum and create scaffolds to support ELLs in the classroom.For Tier 2, Students will be in small groups with a classroom teacher in the classroom setting. For our Tier 3 students, intense pull out instruction is given by the ESL teacher or our Academic Educational Liason . 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. SOFBK uses many pieces of student data to evaluate and inform our ELL program. We look at outcome assessments as a final evaluation of student performance using the ELL Data Analysis Tool . This tool provides such student data from ATS including student biographical information, if they are at an at risk level, two years of NYSESLAT overall scores and breakdown of scores by domain, State ELA and Math assessment data. These results enable us to measure students progress and continue to address students academic needs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our ENL teacher meets regularly with classroom teachers and grade level leaders to discuss and share these findings as well as data from student samples and other assessments. We connect at grade level meetings, during lunch-and-learns, and through email conversations. With these findings, we will work together to adjust our program and to create learning plans tailored to target student needs. 0  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. I At SOFBK, we solely provide a Freestanding ENL program. Schedules are created for instruction with consideration to many factors. In accordance with CR Part 154.2 , based on proficiency level, students will be afforded Integrated ENL and /or Freestanding ENL. Our ENL teacher works cooperatively with classrrom teachers to create meaningful and effective learning objectives and language objectives for students. Depending on needs of students, groups are formed and may be flexible throughout the year, especially as students grow academically and in their proficiency. Groups will be formed based on students academic needs, reading level, and grade band. We do not group students with others that are more than 1 academic year apart. As often as possible, we place ENL students in the same classes and cohort to enable our ELLs to work together and for purposes of pull out and push-in integrated instruction. At times pull out instruction may be heterogeneous and/or homogenous depending on students needs. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our ESL pedagogue creates a schoolwide ENL schedule to ensure all ELLs are serviced most appropriately and effecively. Schedule is designed for each student considering levels, related services, lunch period, times of core subjects scheduled, and times of related services. The new CR154-2 chart is also used to ensure each level is receiving the appropriate number of minutes. Ie: Entering students will receive the same 360 minutes, however 180 minutes will be stand alone ENL, and 180 minutes will be integrated ENL. Therefore the ENL teacher will spend 180 minutes in the students classroom (ELA/Math?SocialStudies/Science) working closely with the classroom teacher, and in addition will be afforded 180 minutes of freestanding pull out instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our ENL program we use the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol ( SIOP) model for instruction. This is a strategy for teachers to use to help make subject matter concepts understandable for students who are still developing English language skills. The ENL and classroom teacher work together to deliver instruction with content objectives and simultaneously incorporate a language objective to further build english langage proficiency. The content objective tells what students will learn during the lesson, and the language objective tells how the student will learn and/or demonstrate their mastery of the lesson by reading, speaking, writing, or listening. Based on the assessment of students academic needs, this may be delivered to the entire class, push in or pull out while developed in small group instruction. SIOP has been proven to be beneficial to all learners. Having both content and learning objectives clearly stated and clearly posted, help set students up for success in mastering the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 1  For our newcomers, we regularly give assessments in the students home language. Many of these students have the language proficiency of a beginner, but have the academic skills and knowledge for grade level math, social studies and more. Later we assess with home language book reports, conversations, and other assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. Currently, we do not have any SIFE students. However, an individualized instructional plan for future SIFE students will receive the mandated amount of ESL instructional minutes as per CR Part 154, according to proficiency level. Their instuction will be differentiated based on their specific knowledge and needs.B. Newcomer students are often serviced in small groups with children from mixed level groups until they have acquired basic inter-communication skills (BICS). Using the SOLOM measuring tool, newcomers are frequently informally assessed in their speaking and listening skill in order to begin instruction to improve their BICS and later CALPS. Newcomers also often need to build foundational knowledge in phonics. C. Developing students instuction is driven by various assessments to determine and build upon student levels. Students are given language objectives through content area learning.D. Long Term ELLs are given assessments to determine which specific areas of english language the student needs to develop. By targeting the areas they need assistance in, we can help these students reach proficiency. E. ENL teacher works with classroom teacher to identify English proficiency skills of these students which may still need intervention. . 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We currently have ELL-SWDs in Self-Contained (12:1) and Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ICT) classrooms. All students are serviced by an ESL teacher using the push-in and pull-out approach. Universal Design for Learning (UDL) principals will serve as a guide to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English Language Development. This method will give each student meaningful access to the curriculum by assuring access to the environment as well as multiple means of representation, expression, and engagement. The following principles should support English language Development for ELL-SWDS:1. inclusiveness- a classroom climate that communicates respect 2. physical space- equipment, resources and materials provide access for participation, a little physical effort in obtaining3. delivery methods- content is delivered and presented in multiple modes4. information access- use of captions videos, accesible electronic formats and printed work5. interaction- accessible to everyone, use of multiple ways for students to participate6. feedback- effective prompting during activity and constructive comments for all studentwork completed7. demonstration of knowledge- provisions for multiple ways to demonstrate studentwork: group work, portfolios, demonstrations, and presentations. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We use flexibility in programming for our ELL-SWDs. Students may attend lessons in other classrooms in some subject areas, as well as receive support in small groups to progress to proficiency. This flexibility gives our students the individualized and differentiated support they need to reach their IEP goals within the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Based on the students needs, various interventions are provided to best accommodate these learners. For students that need to develop and strenghten phonics skills, they will receive support in Fundations. For students that need to grow in comprehension, lessons will be targeted accordingly. For students that need support in math, instruction will be provided to target academic math vocabulary while simultaneously teaching math strategies and procedures. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 2  With more flexible programming and specific targeted instruction for next year, we will assist our students reach their academic goals. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not have nor have we had a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs including after school and supplemental services. Any before or after school programs, as well as other programs will be available to ELLs. Notification will be sent home in the families preferred language to inform about such programs. are afforded equal access to all school programs including after school and supplemental services. Any before or after school programs, as well as other programs will be available to ELLs. Notification will be sent home in the families preferred language to inform about such programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. PS 663 uses Grammar Workshop, Words their Way, Go Math, and Ready Gen. Based on students needs, different materials are used. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our ENL model, students are offered assessments on a classroom level and state level in their home language. In our ENL model, we assess listening skills with note taking, revise previous written pieces, assign book reports in L1, and more. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Each of our classrooms with ELLs are equipped with age appropriate grade level books and resources. For classrooms in need of appropriate books, we supply them. For our beginner 6th grader, we are not using big books , but are presented with information in a more age appropriate and grade level appropriate format. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? PS 663 uses Grammar Workshop, Words their Way, Go Math, and Ready Gen. Based on students needs, different materials are used. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In order to help ELLs and their families become acclimated to our school, these new students are given an orientation and a tour of our school. If possible, they will meet their new teacher before the year begins (or before their 1st day for enrollment mid year) 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not currently offer any language electives at PS663. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a 3  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ELL personnel at PS663 attend the congruent PD as general staff in addition to targeted training in NYSESLAT, ELL content and/or updates, NYSITELL, compliance, LAP/LTI and more. Classroom teachers that work with ELLs will be provied with PD to improve their practices for ELLs. ELL teachers receive equal support as classroom teachers as they engage in the CCLS . When targeted training and support are offered, our ELL teachers will attend to further improve practices as they progress and/or change. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We support our ELL teachers by examining what our students need to move up to their next school, and helping our teachers provide this to students. Our ENL teacher will attend various PD to reach the required number of hours. Through PWeekly and email blasts, we will be kept aware of PD opportunities. Our school secretary keeps records of PD attended inside and outside the building. Sign in sheets are kept on file. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Annual individual meetings are scheduled with families/parents of ELLs through the ENL teacher and parent coordinator. Students program goals, language development progress, assessment results, and language needs are reviewed and discussed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. FOR NUMBER 2 ABOVE---- Written records are kept to keep track of attempts to have annual individual meetings as well as records of the meetings themselves. These records are stored in the ESL classroom. 3. Parental involvement is encouraged to ALL our families, including families of ELLs. School and after-school events are open to all, and families of ELLs are sent a translated invite or flier informing them of the event(s). For example, we have various events showcasing our students work throughout the year. We send a notice to parents in their home language. We also encourage them in our initial registration and meetings to be a part of the school community, and to attend these events. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 4  5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Sarah Kaufmann, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School of the Future BK School DBN: 19K663 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ms. S. Kaufmann Title Principal Assistant Principal Jahmaine Robinson Parent Coordinator Nicole Cafaro ENL/Bilingual Teacher Nancy Rodriguez Parent Ms. Marcelle Good Teacher/Subject Area Robert Freeman Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Ms. Grandison School Counselor Thomas McBryde W. Mock Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Speech Pathologist Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 08/15/2017 08/15/2017 08/14/2017 08/15/2017 08/15/2017 08/15/2017 08/15/2017 08/15/2017 08/15/2017 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 19K663 School Name: School of the Future Brooklyn Superintendent: Thomas McBryde The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Nicole Cafaro ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The ATS and registration enrollment data for our ELLs shows our population prefers their oral and written communication in English. This is primarily indicated on the HLIS form, and again on the language preference questionnaire. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic 4 1.44 4 1.44 8  Bengali Hatian Creole English Spanish 1 3 216 54 .36 1.08 77.7 19.42 1 3 216 54 .36 1.08 77.7 19.42 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Monthly Calendar Progress reports Event and Workshop flyers monthly quarterly monthly Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. translation services, staff translations staff translations translation services, staff translations 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Back to School Night August/September Parent Teacher Conferences (Winter) November Parent Teacher Conferences (Spring) March Family Workshops Ongoing interpretation service(s)? translation hotline, bilingual staff as translators translation hotline, bilingual staff as translators translation hotline, bilingual staff as translators bilingual staff as translators, translation services 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 9  We have a number of bilingual staff members who are the primary contact for families. We will also use the translation hotline as needed Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff are trained during our Summer Institute, and through ongoing PD as needed throughout the school year. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school has the Welcome Poster easily accessible in our entryway to the school. This poster informs families that we can assist them in their native language. The language ID card is available in the main office. We also have the Translation and Interpretation Unit informational brochures available for parents and families to explain the service available, and how to access it. The parents bill of rights is given to parents at the time they come in during registration. It is provided in their home language , via the DOE website, at http://schools.nyc.gov/RulesPolicies/ParentBillofRights/default.htm Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Using the translation services, we will ask the parents when available describe the availability and quality of the service. A written parent survey may be used, but will need to find/create in the parents L1. 0 
