 15K667 School Name: SUNSET PARK HIGH SCHOOL Principal: VICTORIA ANTONINI   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Sunset Park High School 15K667 331500011667 9-12 School Number (DBN): 153 35 th Street Brooklyn, NY 11232 7188401900 7188401925 Phone Number: Fax: Eric Yoak, APO eyoak@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Email Address: Victoria Antonini Vincent Tartaglia Vanessa Adames Tanya Deazle Maria Cruz Destiny Carter, Antonio Hernandez, Melanie Rodriguez Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Julie Stein-Brockway Geographical District: 15 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information JaniceRoss Superintendent: 1396 Broadway, Room 110, Brooklyn, NY 11221 jross11@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-455-4635 Phone Number: 718-455-4684 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn North Field Support Center FSC: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: Bfitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-3954 Phone Number: 718-935-2382 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Victoria Antonini Vincent Tartaglia Vanessa Adames n/a Maria Cruz Destiny Carter Antonio Hernandez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Julie Stein-Brockway CBO Representative, if applicable OrielleGooding Sandra Cordero Member/Parent Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Melanie Rodriguez Member/Student Tanya Deazle Johanna Herrera Member/Teacher (UFT) Member/ Secretary (UFT) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission statement is, “ Sunset Park High School is a diverse and inclusive school that prepares all students for college and for meeting the challenging demands of a changing world. “ Our challenge is to build on this very important foundation to strengthen the ways in which students can stretch themselves and move to the next level, whatever that might be. We have implemented the identification of stretch goals as one strategy by which our instructional focus of productive struggle is realized. We all have someplace to go and effective stretch goal setting is part of career and college readiness both separately and together.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We work collaboratively with our lead community partner, Center for Family Life (CFL), to provide a co-led advisory program for our students as well as a comprehensive after-school, before-school and Saturday program that provides academic assistance, enrichment, sports, arts and student-led clubs. We are continuing to work on student leadership as one lever for change. In addition to previous initiatives such as mentoring/leadership programs provided by CFL and the Arista National Honor Society chapter facilitated by SPHS, we continue to examine the ways in which student athletes can also see themselves as leaders both on and off the playing field/court. We will continue implementing small learning community-based student leadership teams which will increase both the amount and impact of student voice in culture building and decision-making at both the school-wide and small learning community level. For the 2018-19 School Year, we will continue to explore the ways the varied groups for student voice can interact. Our most prominent strength to date is the ways in which we have created a supportive, inclusive learning environment and the ways in which professional collaboration through teacher teams impact this work. Our most recent Quality Review conducted January 11, 2018 identifies teacher teams and teacher leadership development(Area 4.2) as an area of celebration. We continue to be rated as well developed in school culture (both 1.4 and 3.4) as well as stategic-decision making (1.3) and vision-setting (3.1). We were rated proficient in all components of the instructional core (1.1, 1.2 and 2.2) as well as in use of the observation/feedback process (4.1) and progress monitoring (5.1). This data along with a continued downward trend on the NYC School Survey in school leadership and teacher-principal trust speaks to the need for school leaders to increase their visibility, be in classrooms more, and capture/synthesize and communicate progress to the entire school community including families (there is a downward trend citywide in this element of 3%, we are down 5%) according to the 2017-18 NYC Schools Survey. Students with a variety of skills, assets and areas of growth are given the opportunity to articulate their own personalized learning planning in coordination with their SPHS and CFL advisors. Increasingly, we hear how our students represent themselves outside the school. Through internships, service learning projects and the myriad visits hosted by SPHS and CFL, our students consistently present themselves as mature, responsible, and, most importantly, caring and compassionate young people who understand how they can impact the lives of others. Finally, over the past four years, we have developed a portfolio of college access options including early college dual credit (ECDC) and AP courses both as part of the AP for All program and outside of it. All students have access to these options. This past year we have also worked in partnership with organizations at Industry City to bring STEM enrichment programs to students and STEM professional learning opportunities to teachers. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 17% of our students are ELLs with language acquisition needs. 23% of our students have IEPs with needs for scaffolds and differentiation while still having high expectations. We are looking to continue a culture of personalized high expectations. For the 2018-19 school year we will also be implementing a dual language program. Finally, approximately 10% of our students are dual identified students and we will be engaging in school-wide inquiry through grade-level inquiry teams to identify and address those unique needs, how they overlap, how one need might present as another and how to address each one. We will be engaging in professional learning around the roles of Special Education teachers (Instructional Support Specialists) as learning specialists and English as a New Language teachers as language acquisition specialists. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our strengths, according to our School Quality Guide from 2017-18, are in rigorous instruction, collaborative teachers, strong family community ties and trust. Our main growth area is in School Leadership, particular in teacher perception of instructional coherence and trust as measured by the NYC School Survey for 2017-18. Our 2017-18 School Quality Guide shows that we have made substantial progress in the component of student achievement with a four year graduation rate of 77%, surpassing our comparison, borough and city average. In addition, 41% of the Class of 2017 graduated college ready, 10 points higher than our comparison group. 72% of the Class of 2017 completed college coursework. For the Class of 2018, we have a near 84% graduation rate and arate of 86% by August for the Class of 2018. In addition we moved from having 12 students earning the Advanced Regents diploma for the Class of 2017 to having 26 students earning the Advanced Regents Diploma for the Class of 2018 (including two students earning the 0  Advanced Regents diploma with Honors). Our NYC School Survey results for the 2017-18 School Year show a downward trajectory for collaborative teachers, school leadership and trust. While we have increased our student achievement we need to also explore how to continue that momentum while also ensuring equity of teacher voice in our improvement plans. Although teacher teams were cited as an Area of Celebration with an accurate rating of Well-Developed, perception, too, is reality and it is clear that our teachers do not feel heard or trusted. Our most recent Quality Review conducted January 11, 2018, , identifies pedagogy (1.2)), while rated proficient, as an area of focus. Specifically, we need to improve the ways we collect targeted information through both the observation and feedback process (4.1) and through teacher teams and teacher leadership development (4.2) regarding special populations. For example, we are planning on strengthening the way we use the IEP as an instructional tool in instructional planning and implementation for all faculty. We will continue tracking power standards in each course as an instructional and communication tool to students, families and other teachers (for example, Advisors) and will also be implementing a common assessment system via the use of the Assessment Management Platform through Schoology. We are furthering the realization of productive struggle through the professional learning focus of learner-led learning. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 15K667 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1230 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 71 71 24 26 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 103 116 12 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 81.5% % Reduced Lunch 19.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 74.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 7.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.08 4% 26% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 82% 59% 76.8% 3.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A YSH YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A YES NO No N/A 204 218 84.3% 2.8% 22.0% 8.3% 9.5% 0.5% 10 25% 7.4 N/A N/A 83% 73% 77.3% 8% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A YES YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-18 School Quality Snapshot, 85% of our 9th grade students earned enough credits to be on track for graduation, meeting borough and city rates and surpassing comparison group rates. 80% of our 10th grade students earn enough credits be on track for graduation nearly meeting borough and city rates and surpassing comparison group rates. Teachers continue to work in subject-specific content teams (both horizontally and vertically) to analyze quantitative data, student work, teacher practice, and to use outside expertise through professional reading to identify goals and resources needed. Teachers also work in cross-disciplinary grade teams with a common group of students. Working in teams has long been a strength for our school (one of the well-developed components cited in our Quality Review, January of 2018). We will continue the following academic programs for the 2018-19 school year to support rigorous instruction: continued participation in AP for All with supported courses in AP English Language and Composition for all 11th Grade students and AP Biology for students who select it in the 12th Grade, additional AP coursework in English Literature and Composition, Computer Science Principles, Spanish Language and Composition, and World History (exam prep only),Debating US History through CUNY Collaborative Programs for 11th Grade US History, and University in the High Schools(UHS) through the University at Albany for 11th Grade Environmental Science, 12th Grade Reading Literature and General Biology. We will continue participation in Early College Dual Credit (ECDC) program through Medgar Evers College (Brooklyn Pipeline Dual Credit--BPDC) with Precalculus/Calculus in the 12th Grade and Intermediate and College Algebra 2/Trig in 11th Grade through partnership with the Office of Superintendent Watts. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, all students in Cohort U will engage in rigorous curriculum as measured by a 5% increase of students graduating college-ready in four years. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Continue to improve daily attendance through daily school-wide attendance meetings, attendance celebrations and weekly small-learning community based attendance meetings to coordinate outreach and support for students and families. Students and families September 2018-June 2019 Ensure students understand higher expectations through 1:1 conferencing and community-based Town Halls. Share aggregate data with students. Students Build teacher capacity through internal professional learning on learner-led learning, autonomy, Quality IEP writing as well as outside PD through our Superintendence, our FSC, AP for ALL, Debating US History (CUNY Collaborative Programs), Long Island University, Medgar Evers College, NYCDOE Mastery Collaborative, NYCDOE College Access for All, Math for America and other opportunities identified by teachers and supported by the school. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Counselors, Community Assistants, Community Leaders/APs, teachers. Community Leaders/APs, Teacher Leaders, Student Leaders Principal, Community Leaders/APs, Teacher Leaders, Teachers, Superintendent, FSC instructional support, central support, and outside organizations. Track student progress in Cohort U every marking period and communicate out to faculty, staff and students. Students September 2018-June 2019. Community Leader, Guidance Counselors. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will facilitate workshops in collaboration with the PTA on topics ranging from updated ESSA requirements (including Next Generation Learning Standards) to graduation requirements. The workshop on graduation requirements will be conducted early in the year and will articulate what students need to do in each grade to be on track for graduation and beyond. This will occur monthly from September 2018 through June 2019 at PTA meetings. Key personnel include the PTA Executive Board, the Principal, Assistant Principals and teacher leaders with relevant expertise. 4  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session, contractual professional development time, membership in content-specific professional organizations, professional readings, some rescheduling of prep time to accommodate intervisitations where applicable. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. After January Regents administration, there will be an increase of 3% of students in Cohort U who have reached the college-ready benchmark. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Regents data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the 2016-17 School Quality Snapshot, 85% of our 9th grade students earned enough credits to be on track for graduation, meeting borough and city rates and surpassing comparison group rates. 80% of our 10th grade students earn enough credits be on track for graduation nearly meeting borough and city rates and surpassing comparison group rates. Teachers continue to work in subject-specific content teams (both horizontally and vertically) to analyze quantitative data, student work, teacher practice, and to use outside expertise through professional reading to identify goals and resources needed. Teachers also work in cross-disciplinary grade teams with a common group of students. As we encourage students to strive for the highest possible academic achievement, there is a need for students to cope with higher expectations, particularly as we continue the shift to the Next Generation Learning Standards. To do this, we will continue our work with our CBO, Center for Family Life on personalized learning planning within a group social work model through co-led advisories. An area of growth is in capacity building for faculty and staff in understanding the social-emotional causes of unproductive behaviors. For example, on the 2017-18 NYC School Survey, 59%of teachers say that adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities; 57%of teachers say that adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior (by focusing their attention, controlling their emotions, or managing their thinking, behavior, and feelings); 59%of teachers say that adults at their school have access to school based supports to assist in behavioral and emotional escalations. In addition to our continued work with CFL and strengthening our work on Restorative Justice (we are applying for a SEL grant through the Office of the Chancellor for this work), we will also look to our partnerships with NYCDOE programs in Mastery Collaborative and College Access for All to further help us is understanding how to help students access their non-cognitive, executive functioning, foundational skills to reach their full academic potential. We are also looking to build student autonomy in both courses and coursework whether it be through explicit courses via school-wide electives or through special programming such as intensives and/or demonstrations of learning. We will also be engaging in intense professional learning work around learner-led learning inclusive of self- and peer-assessment. We will foster continual "stretch goal" setting. This supports students in efforts to grow while being provided continual supports to achieve their goal(s). This helps foster a healthy relationship between staff members (especially advisors) and their students. When students achieve his/her goals, it is an opportunity to celebrate and push beyond onto the next goal. When students fall short of his/her goals, it still provides a opportunity to reflect on progress and what parts of the process were successful and which parts could be improved. 6  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 80% of all students will identify and meet a "stretch" academic goal through advisor-facilitated personalized learning planning. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? October 2018 and January 2019 September 2018—January 2019 November 2018 and March 2019 PTA Executive Board Teachers, students. Teachers, students, families September 2018—June 2019 Advisors, faculty, CFL, school leadership. Family workshops on curricular/instructional expectations and communication with adolescents about those expectations. Communication will occur electronically and be mailed. Families Grade teams will identify ways to track student identification of stretch goals and to make those goals visible in a way that also allows for change and responsiveness . Students Students, families Students Stretch goals shared in student-led family conferences. Advisors will meet with all advisees in one to one academic conferences to assess students’ progress with meeting stretch goals during Advisory, 9th Period and at other times to assess students' progress with meeting stretch goals. Advisors and other faculty and staff will build their capacity through advisory co-planning with CFL, College Access for All, Restorative Justice professional learning, and through participation in Mastery Collaborative. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. During weekly family engagement time and twice per year during student-led conferences, students, advisors and families will discuss student progress with stretch goals and will anchor their conversations in student work products. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session, facilitation of teacher teams, partial funding of teacher salaries for Advisory class in program, funding from SEL grant, Mastery Collaborative, and College Access for All. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 8  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded X In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2018, 80% of students will be on track toward meeting their stretch goals as reported by their advisors. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advisors will meet with each advisee a minimum of twice per semester during academic 1:1 conferencing time. Teacher teams will choose their own tools to measure advisee progress for reporting and synthesizing. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. While teacher teams and leadership development (4.2) rated as well-developed and identified as an area of celebration, our NYC School Survey for 2017-18 notes a sharp downward trend in this element possibly due to some specific challenges but not entirely so. During the 2017-18 school year we have been exploring the tension (and opportunities) among moments of cohesion and autonomy. We have identified some shared goals based on teacher feedback in the areas of special populations, whole school community-building/cohesion, communication, school culture and school-community relationship building. It should also be noted that in the 2016-17 NYC School Survey, 79% of teachers reported that most or a lot of teachers are actively trying to improve their teaching and 94% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school teachers talk with one another about instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, inquiry teams will engage in work for dually identified students (those who are ELLs and are SWDs) resulting in a move from 79% of teachers responding that a lot or all of teachers are actively trying to improve their teaching to 85% responding positively to the same question on the NYC School Survey. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers/students September-- Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Content teams will develop baseline assessments through the Schoology Assessment Management Platform. Students will complete a baseline assessment in each subject. Inquiry teams will analyze baseline assessment data for all students with specific focus for dually identified students. Teachers Inquiry teams will engage in inquiry cycles (short cycle assessments) to identify and implement strategies to improve teaching practice for impact for dually identified students. Teachers Provide student level data regarding mastery of power standards across subjects to students and families. Students and families 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Instructional content leads and Assistant Principals Inquiry team leaders and Assistant Principals October 2018 October 2018-November 2018 November 2018--June 2019 Inquiry team leaders and Assistant Principals November 2018--June 2019 Advisors, Counselors, AP/Community Leaders, Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Student progress in each course via interim assessments will be shared with families quarterly. Aggregate interim assessment data for all subjects and analyzed for special populations including those who are dually identified will be shared with the entire school community including families via PTA meetings and mailings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session, common planning time, funding for Schoology LMS (enterprise version) and Schoology Assessment Management Platform. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 1  C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teacher leaders, Assistant Principals and Principal will evaluate student achievement using Fall semester data regarding achievement on Regents exams and credit accumulation. Percent of growth will be calculated based on previous year. A three percent increase in overall credit accumulation will be expected for the Fall 2018 semester. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. STARS reports regarding Regents data and credit accumulation. Schoology Assessment Management data reports regarding quarterly assessment data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Effective School Leadership is an area of growth based on the School Quality Guide for 2017-18 While inclusive leadership as reported by parents is higher than the citywide average, teacher influence as reported by teachers is below the citywide average and program coherence/instructional leadership, also teacher reported, is significantly below the citywide average. There is a correlation between this and teacher reported Teacher-Principal trust which is also significantly below the citywide average. On our Quality Review dated January 11, 2018, we received a well-developed rating in both 1.3 (How well does the school allocate and manage resources?) and 3.1 (How well does the school identify, track and meet its goals?). However, we received a proficient rating on 5.1 (How well are school decisions evaluated and adjusted?) which, considered jointly with feedback on the NYC School Survey, speak to the need for transparent, inclusive goal-setting and progress monitoring, shared decision-making regarding mid-course adjustments, and communication to all regarding that work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, indicators of Effective School Leadership to which teachers respond in the NYC School Survey will be within five percentage points of the citywide average. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Develop action plans for identified goals (based on faculty feedback from June of 2018). Include identification of systems for tracking and evaluating improvement. Faculty and staff September 2018 Principal will connect directly with grade team leaders to attend grade team meetings to collect feedback on school initiatives and to engage in collaborative decison-making in consultation with cabinet and other key stakeholders. Teacher grade team leaders and September 2018-June 2019 Cabinet members, grade team leaders, instructional content leads. Principal Principal and Community Leaders/Assistant Principals will increase visibility for students and families through: continued visits to the 9th Grade cohorts to welcome students and clarify schoolwide norms; attendance and, where appropriate, attendance at PTA meetings; increased visiblity during Student-Led Conferences (Parent-Teacher conferences) and Demonstrations of Learning; increased presence at morning entry and continued, distributed presence at dismissal; speaking together at twice yearly Town Halls; co-written welcome letter to families from Principal and Community Leader with pictures. Students and Families September 2018-June 19 Principal and Assistant Principals Develop social media presence to connect school progress, events, and achievments with local Sunset Park community and beyond. Families and community September 2018--June 2019 Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families are invited to twice yearly Demonstrations of Learning (one in the fall, one in the spring) and progress within academic goals are shared with families during PTA meetings. Communication also goes home via Kinvolved and School Messenger to share experiences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 4  Time allocation during weekly cabinet meeting, per session for teacher leadership roles to facilitate family engagement events, reallocating class time for Demonstrations of Learning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, results on a survey for families and teachers developed by SLT will show an upward trend in components of program coherence, instructional leadership, teacher-principal trust and visibility of school leadership with families. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Google Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. One of our strengths is family attendance at on-going, ritualized family engagement events, particularly those co-facilitated with our community partner, Center for Family Life. They include college information nights and community building nights. We need to continue capitalizing on this strength to include more academic awareness in our work with families and community members. We had a family attendance rate of 75% for Open School conferences (student-led) in the fall and 70% in the spring. On our NYC School Survey for 2017-18 we received 85% positive responses to questions about outreach to parents and 77% positive responses to parent involvement in school. However, only 25% of families responded dropping from a 29% response rate the previous year. This suggests an ongoing need to increase bidirectional communication and involvement with families. For example, for the questions "Volunteered time to support this school (for example in the classroom, helped with school-wide events)," and "communicated with your child's teacher about your child's performance" responses skewed toward disagreement. Elsewhere, responses to questions that involved school to parent communication, the response was positive. To that end, we will continue to partner with Kinvolved to increase and facilitate bi-directional communication. It is an on-line tool that will enable teachers to communicate easily and frequently with families. Families can also reach out directly to teachers through this application. Our PTA will host parent workshops throughout the year designed to strengthen empowerment of families as partners in their children's education. In addition, our PTA will be a bridge between academic concerns and the school community to foster positive communication. School leadership (another element in the framework that survey results suggest are an area growth) will lead by example in this area as well. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, there will be an increase of 3% of bi-directional communication with families with bidirectional contact being a way to further realize a move toward family empowerment as opposed to basic family outreach or engagement as measured by Kinvolved reports. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Professional growth/learning opportunity provided to all Advisory Point People on the topic of infusing student work in family conferences. Increase student ownership of student-led conferences so that family attendance will increase. Professional growth/learning oppportunity will also be provided around effective use of Kinvolved. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Advisory Point People, Advisors September 2018-June 2019 CBO leaders,Assistant Principals/Community Leaders, Principal Identify a parent liaison for each small learning community to communicate with each community leader on a monthly basis. Families Foster families’ bidirectional contact with faculty and staff via the inclusion of monthly agenda item for every PTA meeting (i.e. communication with the school: how to do it? How's it going?) and PL during family engagement common planning time for teachers on theme based engagement such as positive messages. School leadership will model by making 20 positive phone calls by Student-Led Conferences/Parent-Teacher Conferences. Families September 2018-June 2019 September 2018--June 2019 PTA Executive Board Teachers, Parent Coordianator, AP/Community Leaders, Principal Family workshop on curricular/instructional expectations and communication with adolescents about those expectations as well as ed tech platforms for communication about attendance, lateness and academic progress in Schoology and Kinvolved. Families September 2018- June 2019 PTA Executive Board. Parent Coordinator, teacher leaders, Principal, AP/Community Leaders. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Center for Family is our lead CBO and provide support with family and community engagement through some co-facilitated PTA events, service learning to area schools, hospitals and other local sites, and a co-facilitated internship program. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 7  Per session,common planning time, partial funding of teacher salaries for Advisory class, parents' time (voluntary). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, there will be a 1.3% increase in bidirectional family contact. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Kinvolved reports, ongoing Google surveys developed by SLT and administered during family engagement events by student ambassadors with iPads. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Tier I (i.e. literacy electives—all students. Tier 2—(i.e. tutoring, student need as communicated by students, teachers, counselors and families. Tier I (i.e. literacy electives—all students. Tier 2—(i.e. tutoring, student need as communicated by students, teachers, counselors and families Science Tier I (i.e. literacy electives—all students. Tier 2—(i.e. tutoring, student Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tutoring, Drop Everything and Read, Small group, Whole Class During the school day, after school, lunch, Saturdays Writing Across the Curriculum, Contemporary Global Issues, American Studies, Providing students with least restrictive environment, Coteaching (ESL and Special Education) Tutoring, Algebra, Geometry, Algebra 2/Trigonometry Applications. Providing students with least restrictive environment, Coteaching (ESL and Special Education) Tutoring, Drop Everything and Read, Small group, Whole Class During the school day, after school, lunch, Saturdays Small group, Whole Class During the school day, after school, 9  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) need as communicated by students, teachers, counselors and families Tier I (i.e. literacy electives—all students. Tier 2—(i.e. tutoring, student need as communicated by students, teachers, counselors and families Tier I (i.e. Advisory) all students. Tier 2(i.e. small group and individual counseling) student need as communicated by students, teachers, and families. Tier 3 (i.e. referral to outside counseling) communicated among students, families, counselor and outside agencies Writing Across the Curriculum, Contemporary Global Issues, American Studies, Providing students with least restrictive environment, Co-teaching (ESL and Special Education) Tutoring, Drop Everything and Read, lunch, Saturdays Small group, Whole Class During the school day, after school, Writing Across the Curriculum, Contemporary Global Issues, American lunch, Saturdays Studies, Providing students with least restrictive environment, Co-teaching (ESL and Special Education) Five guidance counselors and one social worker provide counseling daily. Referrals to outside counseling facilitated by our CBO and other agencies. Small group, individual During the school day 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 70 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide hygenic and school products via counselors. Counselors are also configured in single shepherd model so that students have all their needs met there. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Recruitment from DOE pool of highly qualified applicants  Ongoing partnerships with teaching fellows/ Teach for America and Schools of Education at NYU, Columbia, Brooklyn College, College of Staten Island, Queens College, Hunter College, LIU and St. Francis  Co-teaching to ensure ELLs and Students with Disabilities are in the least restrictive environment  Pipeline to leadership for teachers (CITE, Columbia University, Bankstreet College, NYC DOE Office of Leadership, etc)  Recruitment includes an extensive three part interview process held each spring and facilitated by teachers. This interview process not only impacts recruitment and selection but also serves as a way of introducing candidates and hires to the school culture and environment. We also view hosting visits from teacher preparation programs such as NYU, LIU, Columbia and the NYC Teaching Fellows as well as other teacher residency/preparation programs as opportunities for recruitment as visitors often follow with resume submissions.  Teachers engage in one to one conferences with their direct supervisors to plan teaching programs for the following year that both the needs of students and recognize teacher strengths, abilities and aspirations.  Our distributed leadership model offers those teachers who want to take on a leadership role the ability to do so with ongoing support via support from school leadership and through peer support in sharing of best practices. Teaming is the cornerstone of the ways in which we support one another and build capacity.  Professional development/learning is provided through both school-wide content-based teams and small learning community-based grade teams as well as individual support through the observation and feedback process. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Whole school professional development occurs twice monthly before school, on the Chancellor’s professional development 3  days, and during daily common planning.  Grade teams meet daily to work on the following: o Analysis of teacher work for inclusion of rigorous, engaging tasks. o Analysis of student work o Analysis of student achievement patterns and how to further differentiate curriculum, instruction and assessment to meet students’ needs o Case-conferencing protocols to determine appropriate interventions o Intervention plans o Tuning, Critical Friends and Descriptive Consultancy protocols to provide feedback on classroom practice, pedagogical approaches, curriculum and classroom assessments, as well as to assist in problem-solving  The School Development Committee facilitates school-wide intervisitations, tracks and assesses all professional learning and facilitates school-wide professional learning opportunities.  Paraprofessionals are part of school-wide professional learning opportunities.  The principal and other school leaders attend differentiated professional learning opportunities facilitated internally through weekly cabinet meetings and externally through our superintendence, field support center, and central. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. We are a SWP school. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). We are a SWP school. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 4  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). We are a high school. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our Local Measures Committee comprised of the Principal, three Assistant Principals, UFT Chapter Leader and three teachers representing a range of subject areas, begins meeting in June to evaluate the impact of the current year’s selected local measures and how that might factor into the following year’s identification of local measures. The committee continues meeting over the summer (including attending city-wide professional development) and finalizes its decision in the fall. The local and state measures by which each teacher is evaluated is discussed as part of the initial planning conference and is confirmed via the Advance system and communications between the Community Leader (Assistant Principal) and teacher. Teachers are provided professional development regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction through community, grade team and content team meeting during which they look at results from tools such as the Progress to Graduation tracker and Regents REDS data using protocols such as the ATLAS protocol. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $895, 503 n/a $23, 246 n/a $8,197,964 x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Part A, B, C, D, E Part A, B, C, D., E Part A, B, C, D, E 5  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 6  representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Sunset Park High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the ESSA is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Sunset Park High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 8  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Act; 9  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Sunset Park High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the ESSA, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; 0  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 1  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 2  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm 2. 3. Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: Sunset Park High School This school is (check one): DBN: 15K667 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> Saturday Academy ENL Support: Rationale: This regents preparation program was created to provide Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding ESL students the extra time and support they need to develop their Regents test taking, reading comprehension, and writing skills. It is held across all four communities for 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th grade students with a maximum of 15 ELL students per class. This is a Saturday ENL class that meets from 9:00 AM- 1:00 PM for eight Saturdays prior to the January and June regents administrations, for a total of 16 sessions. The language of instruction is English and the program is led by a licensed ESL teacher. Kruti Suba, Jennifer Queenan, Ashley Cruz, and Gina Mandracchia, Rose Maestre and Sage Forbes Grey all are licensed ESL teachers who teach in this program. Both Rose Maestre and Sage Forbes Grey are dual licensed ENL and Content area Mathematics teachers. Jennifer Queenan is dual licensed in Social Studies and ENL and Ashley Cruz is a dual licensed ELA and ENL teacher. Additionally, two licensed science teachers, two licensed Social Studies teachers and a minimum of two additional licensed Math and ELA teachers participate in our Saturday program. We have developed this enrichment program based upon Regents exam data. Saturday Academy ENL supports are provided in the English language. This program was developed to accelerate the regents exam passing rates of our ELLs through explicit language acquisition coupled with the Regents curriculum. The supportive learning environment develops Regents test taking confidence and provides one to one support to meet students needs. The instruction is aligned to the Living Environment, Common Core Algebra, Common Core English Language Arts, Global Studies and US History curriculum. Some materials used, other than materials published and available on the NYSED site are: The Living Environment Core Curriculum Workbook published by the Topical Review Book company, Common Core Assessment Readiness- Algebra I published by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, and Guerrilla Regents Review books for Global Studies. These materials are supplemental and distinct from what is used during regular class sessions.<!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> After-School and Supplemental Program Information: Sunset Park high school along with their ENL content team (teachers, counselor, school leadership) have developed many supplemental programs that address the needs of our immigrant population both personally and academically. Immigration Justice Now - Immigration Justice Now was created to support immigrant students in history and civics while also allowing a safe space to discuss current issues around laws and immigration. This program is led by two licensed ENL teachers, Kruti Suba and Jennifer Queenan and meets weekly on Wednesdays from 3:35 – 5:05. This program will run the entire school year up to June. The program is run in English and uses Native Language supports when 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information necessary. Academically, this course enhances a students historical and contextual knowledge of the United States which helps students build skills towards successful performance on regents exams in ELA and Social Studies. By addressing current and historical events within US history, students are engaged in both primary and secondary sources that give them access and a place to share in the immigrant experience. This program also offers students opportunities to engage in the community through various activities that involve art, activism and culture. Students are involved in city-wide conferences and events related to immigration and the rights of immigrants. Undocumented students along with allies and their families are given a safe space to discuss their current struggles and concerns while discussing, researching and locating solutions. An additional after school support club run by a licensed ENL teacher, Tristen Jean, is the Chess Club. The Chess club runs from 3:35 – 5:05 on Thursdays and is facilitated in English with necessary native language supports. This program will run the entire school year up to June. Tristan's background in world history and his passion for chess has allowed him to create a club that allows students to learn and practice the game of chess but also delve into the historical and cultural diffusion of the game and its connection to New York City culture. The club has been popular with our Transitioning and Expanding students. This program allows students to work on conversational and strategy based language, engage in critical thinking in a fun competitive manner and increase their use of vocabulary in a more intimate environment. The Literary Magazine began in Fall 2016 and has returned for a third year after its success. Run by an ENL teacher, Gina Mandracchia and an ELA teacher, Jason Green every Thursday from 3:35 – 5:05. This program will run the entire school year up to June. This club has had a high level of ELL and non-ELL student involvement. The literary magazine is a way for students to create, reflect, and express themselves in various media; the students’ pieces are compiled twice a year into a magazine. Students are given access to resources and technology that allow them to discuss personal and real world problems that they feel passionate about. By blending technology, media, creativity, photography, art and web design, students are able to build language skills in speaking, listening, reading, and writing in a low stakes environment that leads to enhancing these skills in the more high stakes academic setting in preparation for academic success. This program is facilitated in English while encouraging the use of Native Languages. Our after school tutoring has been supplements to address the needs of ELLs by offering two days a week Monday and Wednesday sessions run by ENL licensed teachers, Ashley Cruz and Kruti Suba. This program will run the entire school year up to June. This tutoring is included in our after school tutoring program that runs 5 days a week and is partnered with Center for Family Life. During these ENL specific tutoring sessions, students are able to receive more support in their content classes of ELA, social studies, math and science classes with a more structured language focus. Teachers also provide language materials so that students may engage in English language building during these times and when their homework is done. Teachers provide supplemental materials and access to ipads and apps specifically targeted toward language. This program has seen a high attendance of newcomer ELLs who need more one on one support in a smaller setting and gives them processing time and understanding to address their classwork in a more meaningful way. Beyond our after school programs offered the school has developed and implemented regents prep classes that run on 3 consecutive Saturdays on the lead up to Regents in January and June. The dates for the 2018 January Regents prep are to be determined based on regents exam dates and projected support need. The dates for June regents prep are to be determined based on regents exam dates and projected support need These classes are taught in English with native language supports and are taught by both content teachers and ENL teachers. Review books in Science, Math, Global and US history are purchased and the course is designed around content and skills needed for the exams using differentiated and level texts with the use of i-pad for glossaries and materials. Many documents and texts are also provided in a variety of languages. 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information **<!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E-->Any additional funding needed will be derived from other funding sources if required. Any overages in funding will be used for supplies. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: Professional Development Overview: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> The Lead Content Teacher, Jennifer Queenan facilitates the school's bi-monthly ENL content team professional development. While the team ensures that all compliance and programming needs are addressed in the beginning of the year, the team also works to develop language objectives appropriate for Power Standards in our co-taught content classes. Once language objectives are developed, the team then works to create assessments that address content specific assessments and then scaffolds designed to support students leading up to these assessments. With the development and implementation of these assessments, our team is able to assess how well our instruction is addressing the needs of the students in reaching Mastery. In addition, each year the ENL team identifies 1-2 areas of focus for their PD inquiry cycles. For the 2018-2019 school year, the team has identified: 1) developing and implementing effective language objectives in all content classes 2) using effective protocols to facilitate discussion and class participation with ELLs. The ENL team also develops workshops that will be provided to all staff. These three / four professional learning workshops are facilitated during our common planning time in our small community learning structure. This work supports all of our content teachers who work in inclusive and integrated courses in alignment with the CR-154. This also ensure that all staff receive mandated ENL specific PD and have access to best practices for working with ENL students. The foci for the upcoming 2018/2019 school year are: · · TBD · taking into consideration their language development and needs”- Throughout the year 18-19 All ENL teachers work collaboratively to design, facilitate and implement the PDs under the leadership of Jennifer Queenan. The teachers on the ENL content team are: Ben Reeves, Lauren Viets, Tristan Jean, Marjana Lavrencic, Ashley Cruz, Jennifer Goodnow, Kruti Suba, Michelle Kuperman, and Gina Mandracchia. **As necessary, the school will use another funding source to complement any overages in costs that we incur to fund our Title III programs. “Long Term Ells and ELLs with disabilities” &nbsp;- Dates TBD “Designing and implementing language objectives” – content specific &nbsp;- Dates “Solidifying how to implement high expectations for ENL students across contents while 7  rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Parent Engagement Overview: To engage families a the start of the year, Parents and guardians are invited to "Meet you Advisor Night" which is held in September from 6PM- 7PM and Demonstrations of Learning held biannually in the Fall and in the Spring from 6PM- 8PM. We host these events to expose all of our parents to the type of learning that we do at Sunset Park and to afford parents opportunities to interact with their students' teachers. During demonstrations of learning we have staff members who speak Spanish, Chinese and Arabic converse with families when needed. We also hire translators to be present at these events if we can not the need of our parents with staff members. After demonstrations of learning we invite all parents to stay for the Parent Teacher Association meeting where parents learn key information about the school and are trained on key points of the college application process. We use the document "Dream, Believe, Succeed" published by the Office of English Language Learners to ensure high school graduation requirement information and college application and college/ career readiness information is available to all parents in their Native language. Some of these topics include, high school graduation requirements, student progress, after school and Saturday academy program availability to support all students on their path to success, scholarship availability, summer job/ internship programs, community health based services and general news about happenings in our school. We have conducted a needs analysis based on informal conversations with parents and have gathered that our constituents need clear explanations of the High School graduation requirements and the various post secondary academic options available to our students. Our comprehensive advisory program allows parents to develop a close relationship with a pedagogue, who serves as a point of contact and academic counselor for each student. "Meet the Advisor Night" allows parents to begin the year with a strong connection with this pedagogue thus strengthening home school partnerships that are critical to academic success. Parents are notified through letters and fliers sent home, and through our teacher advisory system wherein teachers are responsible and accountable to their grade team leader to make outreach, via phone contact or email to each parent in our school. All teachers in the school have been given the information from the school translation kit with the number of the DOE translation and interpretation hotline. They also have received the information as to how to translate any documents they need into the 32 languages that are available. Our ESL coordinator Gina Mandracchia works with our parent coordinator Lisa Lugo and our cross community ELL counselor Rosemary Mane to reach out to parents and conduct these meetings. Records of these meetings, including agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parents' preferred languages are kept on file by the parent coordinator, Lisa Lugo in her office room 417. <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> Parental Engagement Activities: Parents are invited to attend Demonstrations of Learning once per term and monthly Parent Teacher Association meetings. These events allow our parents and families to engage in and discover the types of learning opportunities their students experience. Parents and families also 8  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities access key information about the school and key points and steps in preparing students for college. Some of the programs and information available to parents and families are high school graduation requirements, student progress, after school and Saturday Academy programs, scholarships, summer job and internship opportunities, community health based services, Dream Act information, know your rights, etc. Parents are notified through letters home through our teacher advisory system and teachers ensure that parent outreach is done through phone calls using the translations service and through Kinvolved platform which our school uses for parent communication and attendance purposes. Parent outreach is also personalized through our advisory program which allows parents to have a consistent point person in one of the their child’s teachers for the that year who also acts as that student's academic advisor and advocate throughout the year. Demonstrations of learning is held during school hours and is designed and implemented by students and teachers. It allows families to get a peak into their child's academic life and work. Parent Teacher Association Meetings are facilitated by the parent coordinator, Lisa Lugo and key staff facilitators, teachers, counselors, and administrators depending on the topic. Below are the tentative dates, times and topics for formal parent engagements opportunities scheduled for 2018-2019 academic year. September 2018: -Welcome Back BBQ -Meet Your Advisor Night / PTA Title 1 informational session 5-7 October 2018: -Know your Rights Workshop 6-7 -Quarterly Principal Meeting with PTA 5-7 -PTA meeting 5-7 November 2018: -College Night/FAFSA/ PTA 5-7 December 2018: -Demonstrations of Learning 1-3 -Multicultural Festival 5-7 January 2019: -High School Expectations PTA meeting 5-7 March 2019: -Road To College PTA meeting 5-7 April 2019: -PTA Nomination Meeting -Demonstrations of Learning 1-3 (Tentative) May 2019: -SPHS and Lifelines Spring Show 4pm 9 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 15 School Name Sunset Park High School Borough Brooklyn School Number 667 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Victoria Antonini Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Gina Mandracchia Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Queenan / ENL Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Brian Oestreich/Social Worker Superintendent Janice Ross Assistant Principal Arielle Brembridge Coach N/A School Counselor Rosemary Mane Parent Norma Garcia Parent Coordinator Lizette Lugo Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 11 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 1  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1206 Total number of ELLs 207 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 17.16% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 K 0 Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 4 0 3 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use Quality Reading Inventories, NYSITELL scores, Spanish LAB-R scores, informal tests of phonemic awareness, on-demand, low-stakes writing, weekly curriculum and skill based teacher-designed assessments to assess reading, writing, and math literacy, and use teacher observations of student patterns of performance in all modalities. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? This data is recorded, shared, and analyzed at daily grade team/weekly inquiry team meetings so that all teachers that come in contact with these students throughout the day are aware of their reading and writing levels. These findings are then further discussed in content team meetings, where curriculum, standards and aligned assessments and skills are created and implemented. These discussions inform our instructional decisions across the curriculum. Our data has revealed that our ENL 2  students make steady progress in listening and speaking but lag behind native English speaking peers in reading and writing. This observation has shaped our school’s instructional plan. We have high levels of co-teaching in content area classes which allows ENL teachers more time to plan with content teachers and integrate reading and writing instruction across the curriculum. These ENL teachers are strategically placed in classes according to the Regents needs at the end of the year as well as co-teaching assignments in ELA. On our individual grade and inquiry teams we have a system of linking content and skill based teacher-created assessments with content power standards. These are tracked each month both qualitatively and quantitatively and are used in specific interventions for individual students and classes. Teacher teams work with observational data in order to implement different scaffolds and guide future instruction that supports students’ needs. This data and teacher work also allows for cross-content and cross-curricular skill building to ensure mastery of necessary skills. NYSITELL data reveals that most of our new students have been at the Entering or Emerging level when assigned to our school. To meet these language acquisition needs, we program our students in classes such as Extended Day 0 period stand alone which is taught by an ENL teacher and specifically designed for newcomer students; other academic electives for Beginner ELLs, cohort content classes in ELA, and other content specific classes such as Living Environment and Global Studies co-taught with an ENL teacher. The schools also utilizes Content Teams to align skills and content with leveled language objectives. ENL teachers and content teachers use these during their regular planning time to co-design differentiated instruction. Inquiry teams also meet weekly to discuss progress, assess student work and formative and summative assessments, and collaborate as a team in order to provide our ENL students with the supports and scaffolds needed. Our school focus this year has been strategic application of formative assessment using both teacher-created and research-based strategies across contents daily, weekly, or by unit in order to modify instruction. This has been supported through bi-monthly Community professional development throughout the year. This has also been reinforced on grade teams during inquiry team when analyzing student work in relation to class instruction and lesson plans / units. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use both summative assessments from the previous end of year and baseline assessments at the beginning of the year to identify areas of need in individual students and the class as a whole. The school leadership, the grade teams and inquiry teams, the instructional teams, and individual teachers gather and disaggregate data from a variety of sources to determine the success of our programs for ELLs, including: the School Quality Review, The School Progress Report, the EDAT, scholarship data from each marking period, student transcript reviews, Regents pass rates and item analysis, class assignments and projects, interviews and surveys with students and parents, college acceptance trends,etc. The following summative assessments are used to identify progress and areas of need: Regents scores and scholarship data for all content areas EDAT Results Aligned unit assessments designed by content teams and implemented school-wide AP for All Touchstone and Capstone vertically aligned assessments in ELA and Science NYSESLAT results to determine growth and recognize patterns for instructional support Baseline assessments also include: Low stakes writing in areas of content Low inference Teacher observations One on one spoken interviews / discussions Teacher created beginning of year content and skills based assessments 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? SPHS uses the summative data to identify factors that may lead to lower academic achievement and then actively addresses these needs through differentiated, personalized classroom instruction as well as extended-day school intervention and 3  enrichment programs, in-school tutoring programs and daily academic conferencing, and supportive parent involvement. Each Grade Team's Academic Success Coordinator facilitates data analysis using these tools to ensure that each Teacher and Advisor are aware of each student's needs in the classroom and in terms of graduation requirements. . Various programs, such as PM School for credit recovery and Saturday Academy for Regents preparation, as well as after-school clubs and leadership activities are tailored to meet the individual needs of students. The AMAO data reveal that this intense focus on language acquisition is enabling a significant portion of our students to pass the NYSESLAT exam. However, Regents data indicate the need for continued focus on intensive Regents preparation and Common Core skill development in all content areas, especially U.S. and Global History. Specific Regents preparation classes for ENL students have been created that use individualized assessment data to personalize instruction. In addition, our team of ENL teachers have developed a linguistic skills continuum and assessment plan for each modality and for ELLs of varying levels. This linguistic skills continuum is intended to serve as a guide during lesson planning and to educate all teachers as to what language objectives are appropriate for ENL students at different levels. These tools also guide selection of appropriate activities and supports for each level. For example, teachers focus on pre- and post-reading strategies and vocabulary development as well as strategies to contextualize the content such as visuals and hands-on demonstrations. We have an ENL teacher on each grade team that leads professional development on language acquisition and have a robust schedule of ENL co-teaching and co-planning across grades and content areas. This ensures teachers are developing and addressing language acquisition objectives related to the Common Core in their lesson planning for all content classes. The teachers at Sunset Park High School understand the importance of preparing students to be successful English Language Learners through inclusion to avoid ostracizing or labeling. ELLs are included in all interdisciplinary units and projects. Instruction in all classes is differentiated and prepares all students, including ELLS, for success on exams and in all facets of their lives. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The school leadership, the Grade Teams and Inquiry Teams, the Instructional Teams, and individual teachers gather and disaggregate data from a variety of sources to determine the success of our programs for ELLs and decide on programming for the following year, including: the School Quality Review, The School Progress Report, the EDAT, scholarship data from each marking period, student transcript reviews, regents pass rates and item analysis. The ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT are specifically used to track progress and program students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The leadership of the school uses the data to program designated ENL teachers for specific content areas indicating need. For example, ENL co-teaching is provided in English, Algebra, and Living Environment in the 9th grade; English and Global Studies in the 10th grade; English and U. S. History in the 11th Grade; and English and Government/Economics in the 12th grade. There is also an ENL teacher on each grade team who shares ENL periodic data in grade team/inquiry team meetings using data analysis protocols. This allows all teachers to be aware of our ELL students' reading, writing, listening and speaking levels and to ensure that proper differentiation is provided to students in their classes throughout the day. As a school we analyze NYSESLAT scores on grade teams and the ENL Teacher Team. We continually target all four language modalities for all students. We have decided as a school disciplinary literacy skills need constant reinforcement as they are required for the Regents exams and college readiness (for example, the extensive reading and writing on the English, Global History, and U. S. History Regents Exams). Therefore we have a high co-teaching program where an ENL teacher works in ELA and in grade-specific end of year Regents These are examples where Inquiry and Grade teams are refining our educational practices to provide rigorous instructional support for all of our ENLs. 4  The ENL results from the periodic assessments informs us that we need to continue to provide ENL specific literacy electives coupled with additional support in the content areas. Students in 9th and 10th grades need to be engaged in a co-created plan for credit accumulation and Regents preparation. In the spring, specific students are targeted for stand-alone and co-taught classes as enrichment for upcoming Regents. To this end, students, Advisors and ENL teachers work together to develop specific strategies and use of alternative resources and native language texts to support ELLs. Additional Language Electives taught by the assigned ENL Teacher have also been added to the instructional support for ELLs that may be chosen by level of language or specific content. These classes are designed each semester based on needs and assessment. These classes include ELA for ELLs /SWD, newcomer beginner classes in all modalities and ENL specific classes in science, math and social studies. In addition, in the Senior Year, ENL students are assigned to the I-Learn Labs where they receive personalized blended learning under the supervision of an ENL teacher. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The SPHS model for ENL students in 9-12 includes an integrated push-in Co-teaching model for instruction where ENL teachers plan and teach collaboratively with content teachers to develop full English proficiency in a content-rich, supportive and differentiated learning environment focused on college readiness for all students. In this least restrictive environment, ELLs have full access to academic content areas including English, Global Studies, U.S. History Studies, Algebra, Living Environment, Earth Science, and Environmental Science coupled with the support of an ENL teacher. In addition, SPHS programs all ELLs for an elective that may be designated by their proficiency level, academic needs or personal interest. These electives provide ELLs with explicit stand alone and/or integrated language instruction and support from an ENL teacher depending on the elective . The model also ensures that Entering and Emerging ENL students also have additional stand alone instruction during extended day that provides a supportive environment focused on accelerated development of language skills and knowledge. In Senior Year, ENL students engage in personalized, blended learning in our Schoology Labs to support their college readiness and Regents preparedness. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? At the beginning of the year we run the RLAT in order to identify former and current ELLs and their needs. Because we have an ENL teacher for every grade team, we ensure that there are enough programmed ENL teacher minutes available to both meet 5  the needs of all levels of ELLs including ELLs/SWDs. Then based on individual student needs and levels, we program accordingly. We use NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, Regents results, scholarship reports, student interest and grade team data to provide additional programming with an ENL teacher in electives and extended day. In addition, we work closely with the programmer and counselors to confirm that classes are indicated appropriately in section properties. By running the RLAT regularly and reviewing the monthly ELL Data Update Report our school ensures that we are meeting the instructional minutes of each of our students. When new students are admitted to our school, we use the NYSITELL and Spanish LAB-R results along with interviews and informal baseline assessments in math and English with an ENL pedagogue in order to ensure that the new admit is programmed for the mandated minutes as well as classes that will meet their academic needs. Programming and Scheduling Information The following table represents a breakdown by level and the number of minutes of instruction each student receives for students including SWDs. Class titles are included with a description below the table. Level Required Time Time Scheduled Possible Classes Entering 3 units of study 540 minutes 540-765 minutes 0 period - beginner ENL elective ELA/ENL Content/ENL Emerging 2 units of study 360 minutes 360-630 minutes ENL elective ELA/ENL Content/ENL Transitioning 1 unit of study 180 minutes 180-450 minutes ENL elective ELA/ENL Content/ENL Expanding 1 unit study 180 minutes 180-450 minutes ENL elective ELA/ENL 6  Content/ENL Commanding .5 units of study 90 minutes 90 - 450 minutes ENL elective ELA/ENL Content/ENL ELL students are scheduled for ELA class that is co-taught in conjunction with an ENL teacher. This allows for ELLs to get ELA time with ENL supports. Students at the entering and emerging levels are also scheduled for some self contained ENL. If the student is transitioning or expanding they may be programmed for an integrated or self contained ENL elective based on a one on one assessment of the students by their teachers or needs from baseline or summative assessments. (Literacy, Regents prep, KTS and/or ENL designed electives designed by ENL teachers). Additional time and homogenous support that is required for entering students is met during zero period ENL. a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In each Small Learning Community at SPHS, students are grouped by grade into 4 cohorts (blocks) of approximately 28 students that travel together for all classes. Each class is heterogeneously grouped. We offer several stand alone homogeneous and heterogenous ENL classes for entering/emerging and transitioning ELL students as as well expanding and former ELLs who demonstrate need. All ENL students receive integrated ENL instruction during their ELA class. These classes are co-taught by a licensed ENL teacher and a licensed ELA teacher. All students have five 45-minute long periods of ENL/ELA each week, totaling 225 minutes. 9th grade students also receive integrated ENL during their 225 minutes of Living Environment and 225 minutes of Common Core Algebra classes. In 10th grade there is integrated ENL in the 225 minutes of Global Studies. In 11th grade, students also receive integrated ENL during their 225 minutes of U.S. History. In 12th grade, ENL students are heterogeneously grouped for Keys To Success with an ENL teacher which serves as the stand alone ENL. They also receive integrated co-teaching in Government/Economics and in ELA. ELA (5 45-minute periods per week, M-F, varied time): This is a co-taught ENL Model that counts as the core English credit and is programmed with English Classes This English class counts as 225 minutes per week of mandated time. All levels of ENL students are included in this model with differentiation based on respective levels, Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, or Commanding. This co-taught class was designed so that ELLs receive direct support for language acquisition by an ENL teacher while being engaged in a rigorous, standards-based curriculum with a content-area specialist. In these heterogeneous groups, ELLs have frequent opportunities to interact with peers to develop both conversational and academic language. Long term ELLs, in particular, benefit from this dual focus. Content ENL Co-taught / Push-in (5 45-minute periods per week, M-F, varied times): This is a co-taught ENL Model that counts as the core content specific credit and is programmed by grade level with Regents-specific, end-of-year exam emphasis. This class counts as 225 minutes per week of mandated time. All levels of ELL students are included in this model with differentiation based on respective levels, Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, or Commanding. This class is taught to support ELLs on their Regents exams at the end of the year with the focus of Living Environment and Algebra in 9th grade, Global History in 10th grade and US History in 11th grade, This co-taught class was designed so that ELLs receive direct support for content and vocabulary acquisition by an ENL teacher while being immersed in an academic Regents class that develops skills and content needed for graduation and college readiness. In these heterogeneous groups, ELLs have opportunities to engage in rigorous content while building communicative and presentation skills needed for future success.. ENL Electives (3 45-minute periods per week, M,W,F 1st periods 8:48-9:33): There are several electives that provide 7  integrated and stand alone ENL instruction to ELLs based on specific needs of students or personal choice. These classes also offer elective credits. For entering students, a stand alone class of 3 45- minute periods per week, provides students with instruction and support in all modalities at the beginner level with specific focus on phonetics, math literacy, vocabulary and conversational English. Emerging students receive a stand alone class that supports their academic needs in content integrated classes through complementary curriculum deeply focused on language building and literacy skills used in content areas. Heterogeneous electives in a stand alone format are also offered in Regents prep classes where specific interventions are needed in Living Environment, Algebra, and Global History. These prep classes include both preemptive and intervention targeted classes that support first time Regents test-takers and students who are retaking the exam from previous years. Literacy enrichment elective classes taught by ENL teachers provide the explicit instruction in reading, writing, speaking, and listening for ELLs in the transitioning, expanding and commanding levels. These electives also support ELLs in content courses by designing and aligning curriculum around American Studies, a combination of US literature and US history, creative writing, human rights and other topics that change by semester through the needs and population targeted in these courses. These mixed-ability groups provided opportunities for peer support in language development and students are encouraged to be self-reflective and metacognitive. Instructional activities include literature circles, use of multi-leveled texts, native language supports, and scaffolded projects and presentations. ELLs with IEPs, in particular, benefit from this intensive language instruction. Extended Day, 0 period Beginner English (4 45- minute periods per week M-Th, 8:00 - 8:45): This is a 0 period ENL class that counts as an English elective credit (.5 per semester) as it meets from 8:00-8:45 am four times/wk. This was created to give entering and emerging ELL students extra time and support on a daily basis and is held across communities. This class was developed to accelerate the language acquisition of entering and emerging ELLs through explicit English language instruction that parallels the content-area curriculum. This supportive learning environment develops confidence and provides one to one support to meet individual needs. The instruction is aligned with the Science, Global and Math curriculum and fosters both BIC and CALP language development. Students designated as SIFE are given specific attention and support during these daily classes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our model, each grade has some content classes co-taught with an ENL teacher and a content teacher. The ENL teacher works to differentiate the lesson and provide comprehensible input and supported output based on Universal Design for Learning. Sometimes this involves modifying the material, providing Native Language support, or creating a different activity where material is presented using multiple intelligences. If the content class is not co-taught there is always opportunity for content teachers to work and plan with ENL teachers to ensure that they are confident in delivering instruction to ELLs. There is a daily grade team meeting where content area teachers, an ENL teacher and ISS teachers work collaboratively to discuss student progress and instructional strategies. During this time, once a week, the team works in inquiry where student work is analyzed and lessons are discussed in order to provide feedback on instruction and possible supports or modifications needed In order to deliver differentiated instruction infused with ENL strategies across all content areas. These research-based strategies are effective for ELLs, former ELLs, and ELLs with IEPs. Some examples of content-based differentiation to develop academic literacy include: •Scaffolding strategies such as graphic organizers and contextualizing content, leveled and chunked readings, pre-reading and post reading practices; •Providing comprehensible input such as visuals, models, clear explanations and demonstrations; •Explicit academic vocabulary instruction using word analysis, links to prior knowledge, recognizable vocabulary or cognates, 8  teaching roots and parts of speech when useful, picture dictionaries and use of the Common core aligned Vocabulary Action Toolkit; •Fostering interactions among students for practice and application of content and language skills and knowledge such as partner reading, group projects, and presentations with various roles and tasks; •Use of instructional technology and adaptive materials; •Increased use of multicultural and native language materials and resources; •Developing students metacognition and use of literacy strategies; •Developing numeracy. In an effort to align to CCLS we have an increased use of non-fiction texts, argumentative writing, using textual evidence in writing and encouraging students to make real-world connections and explain metacognitive mathematical strategies. In Math classes, ENL teachers are a great asset in teaching writing because of increased demands that students write their mathematical thoughts and processes as well as interpret word problems. We have developed an ENL skills continuum that all content teachers have integrated into their units of study. We have clear expectations for different levels of ELL students in writing, beginning with writing a summary, citing evidence, explaining evidence, analyzing evidence and then connecting evidence to outside events. All teachers understand this continuum and how writing skills build in cumulation to CCLS. The ENL team worked closely to bring language objectives and the bilingual language progressions to content teams and co-teachers in order to assist and guide content teachers in differentiation for the different language proficiency levels in both receptive and productive activities. Next steps for the upcoming year, ENL teachers will work with content teams to write and implement language objectives into lessons and units that align to the power standards identified by these content teams. For all ELLs, we employ Universal Design for Learning as a tool and resource to support each student’s need for multiple means of representation, action and expression, and engagement. We use this tool to assess how well tasks, resources, assessments, and classroom environments support ELLs at all levels and to share strategies and accommodations with all teachers. In addition, we work to provide students with choice and ownership to ensure self-directed, independent learning. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? N/A 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. a. SIFE If students are classified as SIFE, all teachers are informed and provided strategies for use in instruction. The ENL teachers work closely with the students to help develop the students' phonemic awareness. If their first language is Spanish we work to develop their Spanish literacy, while simultaneously exposing them to manageable and relatable text. We also patiently help transition the student into a school setting and teach them the norms of school behavior. Visualization and kinesthetic activities are the primary focus of their assessment. Content area teachers use differentiated assignments and assessments and all teachers on a team are aware of individual student goals. SIFE students are registered to attend zero period class for entering and emerging ENL instruction where scaffolded BICS is taught as well as a beginner ENL elective class. We also have a dedicated and persistent attendance team that ensures these students attend school. b. Newcomer Newcomers are supported in all of their classes with native language materials, visual aides, bilingual dictionaries, alternate assessments and assignments, and assistive technology. Extra time is provided to students as needed. Our newcomers are 9  scheduled to attend zero period class for entering and emerging ENL instruction as well as a beginner ENL elective class and receive all of their mandated ENL minutes. Content area teachers are aware of individual student goals, and reading and writing instruction is heavily scaffolded and personalized to meet the individual student needs. c. Developing Transitioning and expanding students are assessed regularly by their content and ENL teachers in order to evaluate their needs on a one-to-one basis. Depending on the observations of the teachers, students may be provided with scaffolds in reading and writing that allow them to develop skills needed including, graphic organizers, sentence starters, visual vocabulary references, chunked texts, assistive technology, and native language references. Teachers also assess when it is necessary to remove scaffolds in order to build independence and self-driven production of assignments. These students may also receive small group instruction support, extra time on assessments or written activities or modified tasks that work on specific receptive or productive skills during instructional time in the classroom. d. Long Term Long term ELLs and ELLs who have received between 4- 6 years all receive their mandated time. Accommodations are personalized and provided to individual students as needed. During the daily Grade Team Meeting, ENL teachers discuss and advocate for the needs of these students and teachers collaborate on the instructional goals and plans. We have textbooks and materials in native language available for student use and students who have been here for 4-6 years comfortably enjoy and use both in conjunction. In addition, analysis of assessments and student work shows that academic vocabulary acquisition is a particular need for this group of students and so both ENL and content teachers provide targeted vocabulary instruction. Teachers strategically design appropriate flexible groupings in their classrooms and always use differentiated assignments and assessments that meet student needs and allow them to appropriately demonstrate their learning. e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Former ELLs who have passed the NYSESLAT continue to follow the ENL schedule for the two years after testing commanding as a component of the continuing transitional support they receive. They are typically scheduled for a class with an ENL co-teacher in ELA and in at least one content class. We work conscientiously with grade teams to program our students into cohorts that will best serve their educational needs. If the teachers on the grade team determine that the child is benefitting from these supports they will continue to receive them for two or even three years afterward. Teachers also work as a team to decide where to program students for electives and whether the appropriate elective is an intervention ENL classes or student choice. We also address further needs by evaluating elective choices and whether specific or regents based electives would be more beneficial for a student. Test modifications are provided for two years after an ELL tests at the Commanding level on the NYSESLAT. ALL ELL Subgroups Test modifications for all current and eligible former ENL students include time (starting with 6 hours for all and assess one on one basis), a separate location, translated versions of the exam when available, the ability of use bilingual glossaries and word-for-word bilingual dictionaries, oral interpretation of exams into languages that do not have written translated tests (such as Arabic, Bengali, Urdu), and responses can be written in LOTE for exams other than ELA. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our teachers use a range of technology to support ELL/SWDs including a blended learning platform, Schoology; Brain pop (in English and Spanish); video clips to preview and review material; Elmo and Smartboard projectors to support students learning with visual aide and modeling; and audiobooks to assist with reading. We use co-teaching in core content classes to ensure that SWD are in the least restrictive/ inclusive setting while at the same time receiving the curriculum through modifications and scaffolds. Teachers modify and chunk texts, use different leveled texts on the same theme, create thematic and interdisciplinary units, create alternate assessments, and plan field trips and learning experiences that support their 0  curriculum. ELL/SWD receive their ENL instructional time during the day through our program model that includes a co-teaching cohort with a content, ENL and ISS teacher in both ELA and grade specific content. For students in self contained, we program their ENL supports through their electives which are chosen by their teachers on a one-to-one basis evaluated by their needs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The mission of SPHS is based upon inclusion and equity. 95% of Special Education services are delivered through integrated collaborative co-teaching. This flexible programming ensures that ELL SWDs interact with non-disabled peers. IEP teachers work with families to discuss the best course of instruction for SWD. They use the translation hotline to conduct these IEP meetings in the primary language of the families. These evaluations, the expertise of the IEP teachers, and the desires of the parents will determine if a student will get all of their instruction through ICT or if they will have some classes self-contained. We currently have some ENL students attending self-contained ELA and math and other ELL SWD receiving services via ICT. ENL/students with disabilities receive content instruction from a content teacher and a special education teacher. They receive their ENL minutes during co-taught content classes or a pull out ENL class which is co-taught by an ENL and a Special education teacher or taught by an ENL teacher. These classes are a mixed-leveled groups of SWDs and general education students. The curriculum of these classes is aligned to the Common Core, follows SPHS curriculum maps, and mirrors what all other reading and writing elective classes are doing on the grade level. All students, including ELL/SWD are programmed for all regents exams and will even be programmed for AP exams beginning this year. We have worked as a team of educators to develop a linguistic skills continuum that is used in curriculum mapping and unit planning by many of our content teachers to ensure that all daily lesson plans have linguistic objectives and congruent tasks and resources suitable for all students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for ELLs are embedded in our co-teaching model for instruction where ELLs have full access to academic content areas including English, Global Studies, US Studies, Algebra, Living Environment, Earth Science, and Environmental Science coupled with the support of an ENL teacher who provides additional instructional time in targeted subject areas. The ENL electives are specifically designed by an ENL teacher based on the needs of our ELLs per semester and year which is assessed through NYSESLAT, regents results and scholarship reports. These electives provides tri-weekly literacy instruction. ELLs in all grades engage in a bi-weekly advisory class with a focus on socio-emotional learning and team building. Advisors work with students to review academic records and set individual learning and stretch goals. These learning goals are communicated to parents throughout the year both in person and through parent outreach via multiple platforms in the parent’s language of preference. In addition, advisory programming address college and career pathways in order to help students plan for their future. In all of these conversations and lesson plans, the individual needs of ELLs are taken into account. Often ELLs are in an advisory with an ENL teacher and bilingual Center for Family Life partners. Advisors also use flexible grouping of students in advisories to help scaffold and meet student language needs. During senior year, students engage in blended learning in our Schoology labs where curriculum is designed by both content and support staff in order to support college readiness and Regents preparedness. Our current schedule allows for a period 9 which is built into our schedule for academic tutoring or classroom interventions where students can have extra time and access to teachers and resources to supplement their daily schedule. Teachers use this as an opportunity to invite students to engage in small group and one on one intervention beyond the class time. Students also receive additional support and academic enrichment in our varied and rich after-school program. Each day, ELLs have access to individual tutoring, sports and Arts programs with SPHS teachers through our cooperation with Center for Family Life (CFL) held everyday after school. Some of the programs include the SPHS Dream Team, a program for immigrant students and allies in which students discuss current trends in immigration, advocacy work, and pathways to citizenship. Saturday Academy is a voluntary intensive regents review class offered multiple Saturdays in Fall and Spring leading up to 1  regents exams. This class may be teacher led, independently guided or small group depending on the teacher and the population. Access to resources and study materials are available in multiple languages and address key skill and content needs of the the students in attendance. In addition, this past year the 9th grade class had an influx of newcomer ELLs, several of whom are classified as SIFE and many of whom have low math literacy rates. In response to student needs identified by Algebra teachers and the ENL coordinator, we decided to program an ENL teacher in up to 5 45-minute periods in Algebra. As a result, our newcomer students received needed support in language acquisition in math and in preparing for the Common Core Algebra Regents. Extended Day 0 Period ENL, offered in the morning, was created to give entering and emerging ENL students extra time and support on a daily basis and is held across communities. This class was developed to accelerate the language acquisition of entering and emerging ELLs through explicit English language instruction that parallels the content-area curriculum. This supportive learning environment develops confidence and provides one to one support to meet individual needs. The instruction is aligned with the Science, Global and Math curriculum and fosters both BIC and CALP language development. Students designated as SIFE are given specific attention and support during these daily classes. ELLs also participate in extended day, blended learning PM and Summer School sessions as needed. Teachers and guidance counselors, including our ELL guidance counselor, work together to program students for these classes as needed. PM and Summer School includes targeted interventions based on student needs. As in all of our content classes, teachers use assistive technology and differentiate materials using native language supports, graphic organizers, leveled readings, and differentiated assignments and assessments to meet the needs of ELLs and all students in the class. The blended learning platform also allows for students to access different materials online in order to supplement their needs and build autonomy. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This upcoming year, we have various initiatives designed to intensify our instruction, enrichment, and remedial efforts. One of these will be the upcoming Electives offered in the Fall and Spring. In the Fall, the school will use an accreditation protocol for the upcoming electives to be offered. Several ENL teachers will be submitting curriculum maps and class proposals based on their assessments and findings in the data to meet our upcoming student population for stand-alone. Some ENL teachers will also be working with content teachers to submit co-teaching curriculum plans for accreditation in various contents and topics to meet the needs of inclusive classes. These electives will continue to address needs for success on the Regents, literacy needs in reading and writing, conversational and cultural needs and allowing for both receptive and productive use of language in all modalities. Every fall, our school also works with teachers and support staff to design after-school programs and clubs that fulfill both teacher and student interests while also considering and aligning with the student population and needs. These after-school programs enrich student learning and community through the arts, games, performance, leadership and tutoring needs. Programs directed by ENL teachers and designed to engage ELL students have been photography club, literary magazine, Dream team, ENL tutoring in writing and grammar through games and many more. Currently, we have scheduled our 9th grade Algebra as a co-taught class with an ENL teacher for all five 45 minute periods. However, we will reassess the need for this programming after the fall semester based on the incoming students and math literacy of the 9th grade ELLs, particularly our entering and emerging newcomer ELLs. This assessment will also inform us what other contents or grades of focus would benefit from an ENL teacher. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have never had a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. SPHS is built on a culture of inclusion and equity with no "tracking" and equal access to pre-college courses. O this end, ENL students are programmed for all classes and are scheduled in integrated cohorts including all Regents exams and classes. ELLs receive their services in our inclusive, heterogeneously grouped services through co-teaching in English and one other content area and through a chosen or targeted elective class with an ENL teacher tr-weekly. In addition, we schedule our Beginner class for extended day, 0 period. All of our extra-curricular and academic support programs have open access for all ELLs: daily 2  lunchtime and after-school tutoring; Saturday Academy for Regents preparation, PM School, Summer School, library access during lunch where we have an extensive selection of high interest books in English, Spanish, Arabic and Chinese; after school arts, leadership, and sports programs, etc. These programs are advertised to all students during an "After School Fair" that all student attend during a regularly scheduled class. There is also signage in the school stairwell, and hall ways advertising clubs, in English and other languages. After school schedules are distributed to all students twice per year in advisory and are available in the main offices.. Advisors also work with students to give them options and make recommendations based on their academic needs and social interests. In addition to an advisor, our school ENL counselor works with students to supply them with information and ideas for how to supplement both their academic and social needs during and after school. Parent notifications about credit recovery and Regents review courses are sent home in English and the home language. All of these students are invited to participate in AP classes when applicable and attend all off-site field trips. The ENL instructional team receives newsletters from the division of ELL and student support that we use throughout the year to inform and assist students in summer time opportunities available to students. Some of these programs include “Youth Insights” at the Whitney, with whom we have developed a strong partnership over the past several years, College Now summer course, NYCDOE citywide courses, and additional recreational and academic programs provided by the city. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our classrooms are technology-rich in hardware and software. All of our ELLs have access to school wide technology and each of our 12th grade ELLs are assigned a computer for independent use. Each teacher has a lap top cart with a projector and an ELMO or a smart board in their room. Classroom computers are used to provide differentiated assignments for all levels of ELLs. We have radios, headphones, laptop carts and projectors available on each floor for the teachers' use. We also have Spanish language versions of Math, Science, and Social Studies textbooks and bilingual dictionaries/glossaries in each class. Translation applications are also available. Classes have content-based picture dictionaries and content texts on multiple reading levels. We use bilingual glossaries, provided by the state, for Chinese and Arabic speaking students. Teachers use online translation tools, such as Google Translate, and word to word bilingual language apps. Many of our our colleagues translate activity guides and lesson materials. We have purchased many copies of novels read in ELA in native language. Students are encouraged to read in the native language first and then follow the class activities in English. The ENL teacher will determine which language the student should work in in the class. Our goal is to integrate our ENL students to the highest capacity while they are in the classroom. We research and purchase many supplemental content material for the Sciences and History. We use National Geographic books, which are available on many lexile levels and have grade appropriate images and data. We also use resources like NEWSELA to provide class texts on multiple levels and in Spanish language. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We have many teachers on staff who speak many languages: Spanish, Mandarin, Cantonese, Italian, French, Russian, Arabic, Hindi and Slovene. Teachers translate materials created for activity guides and to use as resources as needed. We employ supplemental class texts books and novels in languages other than english when available and we use thoughtful student groupings to allow students to translate for each other when needed. Many students preparing for the Regents are provided with translated copies when available where they can prepare for the exam and practice writing in their home language. Students are encouraged to prepare for Regents exams as they would perform on the actual test. Their writing is read, assessed, and given feedback by teachers in the school who are able to accurately evaluate the home language literacy. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ENL teachers find literature that is age and developmentally-appropriate while linguistically targeted and rigorous for our ENL students. We have mature systems and structures in place to collaborate and share materials that have been successful for ENL students. We have two resource rooms with materials for teachers to use in their lesson planning that presents content using graphics, visuals and chunks of text. ENL teachers often write their own materials so they are personalized and cognitive level appropriate for their students. The ENL content team also works closely to assess and evaluate materials to be used in the classroom and share successes and resources used in the past in order to collaborate and allow consistency across contents and grades. Our ENL Curriculum site houses a variety of curriculum maps, assessment plans, language progressions, unit plans, etc. that exemplify appropriately differentiated ENL instructional materials that support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 3  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are collocated with a D75 school (P371K@H667) that uses the second floor of our building. We collaborate with an Inclusion program for their students with IEPs; our ISS teachers meet with their service providers to discuss the needs of individual students but the school does not currently have any ELLs that we currently serve. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs who visit the school before the beginning of the school receive an orientation from the Parent Coordinator and/or our ENL or other Guidance Counselors. Each June, we also have a "Meet and Greet" for all new 9th grade students and their families where specific outreach is made to ENL families, including information about the ENL program at our school including resources, accommodations, programming and graduation requirements. In addition, our school works with the Center for Family Life at this event to ensure that new students, including ELLs, are introduced to their 9th grade teachers, the layout of our school, and the Advisory model that we use before the school year even begins. Translators provide an overview of the programs and answer any questions. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Our school recently changed our schedule and now offers both stand-alone electives for Newcomer and Beginner ELLs. Every semester a new list of elective courses is provided based both on student needs and choice, teacher expertise, and Regents specific electives. In the 2016-2017 year we offered Regents preparation courses for both pre-emptive and targeted intervention with an ENL teacher in Living Environment, Global History, and Algebra. Other classes offered topics in humanities that supplemented ELA and Social Studies courses that were developed to address Transitioning to Expanding students needs in reading, writing and vocabulary while also addressing skills needed in those classes and increase literacy. There will be some slight or minor changes to the electives next year based on data from end of year assessments, student populations, needs and wants of both teachers and students. The elective courses offered to students each year is responsive to the needs of our ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? School-wide professional development at SPHS is always designed with the needs and strengths of English Language Learners in mind. Both the ENL Content Lead and ENL Coordinator are members of the School Development Committee, a group of teachers and school leadership that designs school-wide learning and creates the professional development plan for the school. An ongoing focus for our school has been learner led learning and teachers were given tools and resources to scaffold and ensure ELLs have the same level of access to choice and rigorous instruction that all students in our school receive. In addition, each Grade Team spends 45 minutes a week engaging in Inquiry cycles of professional learning, designed around questions and problems-of-practice selected by the team. In each cycle, teams analyze student work and “tune” instructional 4  materials and always include ELLs among the students in the sample under study. In this way, Grade Teams are continually using protocols for reflective practice that address the needs of the ELLs they instruct. The ENL Content Team meets bi-monthly for 45 minute professional development periods and these meetings are facilitated by the ENL Content Lead, who designs professional development according to student and teacher needs. Topics have included: meeting the needs of Students with Interrupted Formal Education, writing language objectives, and selecting power standards for ELLs and all students, including meaningful academic discussion opportunities in daily lessons for ELLs, NYSESLAT administration and how to use NYSESLAT data to design instruction, and sharing best practices in co-teaching models. ENL teachers also individually attend off-site professional learning sessions as needed. In addition, the ENL Team designs at least 4 professional learning sessions for all teachers of ELLs in the school which are integrated on the Grade Team or Community Level. These sessions are described in more detail below. The alternate placement bilingual paraprofessionals are supported by and included in the professional learning offered throughout the school year. This includes their inclusion and collaboration at the bi-weekly 45 minute professional development periods as part of the ENL content team. The paraprofessionals also participate in the 4 professional learning sessions done within the grade teams and small learning communities. Another support for the alternate placement paraprofessionals is the professional learning that they will participate in throughout the year facilitated by our field support center (FSC). These supports allow for these paraprofessionals to meaningfully collaborate with the ENL content team, teachers and explore the best ways to support the ENL students that they work with. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In addition to the school-wide professional development provided above, the ENL content team designs 4 or more professional development sessions are designed for content teachers in each community and cover topics such as: Community PD #1: Introduction to the ELLs (done in grade teams) - At the beginning of the year, each ENL teacher reviewed the ELLs with their grade team. The discussion includes their levels (and what it means to be entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, commanding) and other pertinent information content teachers should know gleaned from disaggregated scores, personal inventories, etc. Community PD #2: Creating a Welcoming Environment for ELLs - The purpose of this PD, given toward the beginning of the year, is to share and discuss purposeful strategies that all teachers (especially content teachers) can use to make the school and their classrooms a welcoming environment for ELLs, particularly beginner and newcomer ELLs. The PD involves a brief Do Now to get teachers to better understand how beginner ELLs sometimes feel in class (by getting teachers to step into the shoes of our students), a video from students, and time in grade teams brainstorming strategies already used and strategies to use to create more welcoming environments for ELLs. Community PD #3: Scaffolding Receptive Learning for ELLs - The purpose of this PD is to share and discuss strategies that all teachers can use to scaffold receptive learning (listening and reading) of content for ELLs. The PD involves a brief Do Now to model some strategies, a video from students about strategies their teachers have used that have helped them, and time in content teams to practice scaffolding receptive components of lessons (that teachers bring or sample lessons provided). Community PD #4: Scaffolding Assessment for ELLs - The purpose of this PD is to share and discuss strategies that all teachers can use to scaffold productive learning (both formative and cumulative assessments in speaking and writing) for ELLs. Building off the previous PD, this PD will give teachers time to think about how they can appropriate design formative and cumulative assessments for ELLs, particularly entering-transitioning ELLs, that allows these students to accurately demonstrate their learning. Community PD #5:Speaking to ELLs about the Regents (done in grade teams) - In May/June, each ENL teacher will speak with advisors about modifications ELLs and former ELLs can expect for the Regents, so that advisors can then speak to their ELL advisees. The purpose of this is to ensure that students have accurate expectations about the modifications they should be receiving and to effectively use these accommodations during the exams, including translated editions of tests (ELLs will know which Regents they can expect this for), extra time (ELLs will know how much time they should expect for each Regents, whether it is time-and-a-half or double-time), and ipads with word-for-word translations on the English Regents. 5  Records of professional development activities are kept by our school secretary, with both the agenda and attendance kept on file. In addition, ENL teachers continually design PDs based on content teacher needs and feedback around topics including: teacher expectations of ELLs, strategies and scaffolds for ELLs and ELLs with IEPs, and language objectives/teaching academic English for ELLs and former ELLs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? To ensure that individual meetings with parents of ELLs, ENL teachers are compensated to conduct these at mutually convenient times with parents. At these meetings, teachers and parents of ENL students discuss the goals of the program and each students’ progress across the content areas. These meetings may be scheduled according to the availability of the parents but time of year may also be taken into consideration in order to have proper data and information to communicate to the parents. ENL teachers also may schedule these meeting during school day hours by scheduling meeting during their preparatory hours or our after school, period 9. ENL teachers work closely with their Grade Team members to collect data and progress on their students in classes where they do not co-teach in order to provide parents with progress and areas of growth in each content. ENL teachers also prepare for these meetings by collecting student work and necessary data from both formative and summative assessments. We use teachers fluent in the home language or the DOE translation hotline to communicate and prepare information in advance in the predominant languages of our population via the Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Sunset Park High School understands the importance of collaborating with parents and families to increase student achievement and foster the emotional and social competency of our young adults. We are committed to working closely with all our parents, especially of our English Language Learners. Through a spiral of communication that involves teachers, advisors, guidance, and our community partner, Center for Family Life, we create authentic relationships with families that strengthen these partnerships. In addition, we use the individual meetings with parents of our ELLs to strengthen bi-directional communication in support of our students. We begin the fall in September with a family BBQ where parents and families are invited to come and meet leadership and teacher staff along with CFL. This is an opening to the year that allows families access to staff, PTA information, Center For Family Life resources and opportunities, and formal introduction to the Parent Coordinator. In addition to regular Parent-Teacher conferences, parents are invited to various events that describe the curriculum and celebrate student achievement. In particular, we hold a "Meet your Advisor Night" which invites parents to learn more about our course offerings and how these offerings support our students. In addition, we hold College nights where the application and financial aid process are discussed. We also schedule “Demonstrations of Learning” where students share how and what they’ve learned in their classes. Translation service for Spanish, Chinese, Arabic speakers is provided and our school functions are conducted in both English and Spanish. Parents are also invited to specific PTA nights designed to meet parent needs and interests. For the past 3 years, we have organized a night on resources for immigrant communities. In the past, we have had lawyers come and discuss the DACA program and pathways to college and financial aid for immigrant and undocumented youth. This past year, we invited Legal Aid as well as local community groups to come present on pertinent legal information for immigrant families. Fliers for and presentations at these events have had translation services for Spanish, Chinese, and Arabic. We are currently partnered with NYC Adult Education Programs that provides night and summer courses aimed at parents interested in furthering their English Language skills. Our Parent Coordinator has reached out to all parents through email 6  blasts, a newsletter in multiple languages, and phone contact. ENL teachers also discuss these opportunities with their students in order to ensure the information reaches all parents. In this way we maximize the involvement of all parents in our school community. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Victoria Antonini, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Sunset Park High School School DBN: 15K667 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Victoria Antonini Title Principal Arielle Brembridge Assistant Principal Lizette Lugo Parent Coordinator Gina Mandracchia ENL/Bilingual Teacher Norma Garcia Parent Jennifer Queenan / ENL Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A N/A Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Rosemary Mane School Counselor Michael Prayor Anthony Pizzoli Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member NA Brian Oestreich Other Social Worker N/A N/A Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/23/17 06/23/17 06/23/17 06/23/17 06/23/17 06/23/17 N/A N/A N/A 06/23/17 6/23/17 06/23/17 06/23/17 N/A N/A 9  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 667 School Name: Sunset Park High School Superintendent: Michael Prayor The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lizette Lugo Gina Mandracchia Savoy Jennifer Arielle Queenan Brembridge Parent Coordinator Yes ENL Coordinator ENL Content Lead Community Leader No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To assess our school's written and oral translation needs, we use the following assessments and the resulting data is shared throughout the school. All students receive the DOE Language Preference Forms and these are collected by their Advisors. The Home Language Identification Survey is given to each new student and his/her family. We also use ATS (RCPL), Blue Emergency Card information and, when applicable, the student's IEP. In addition, parent surveys and informal assessments are conducted during our Parent-Teacher Association meetings, School Orientations and other school functions such as “Meet your Advisor Night” and College Access Events. ENL teachers call and introduce themselves at the beginning of the year in order to set up one-on-one 0  meetings to discuss each child’s academic needs and growth. Finally, each student's Advisor contacts each home at the beginning of the year to determine the best way to maintain effective communication between the home (Email, Text via kinvolved, calls, etc.) and our school including Kinvolved preferences. . 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language ARABIC BALANTE BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) CHINESE ANY CANTONESE FRENCH FULANI HAITIAN CREOLE MANDARIN ENGLISH POLISH RUSSIAN SLOVAK SPANISH URDU Written Preferred 58 2 Percent Written 2.9 0.1 Oral Preferred 57 2 Percent Oral 2.85 0.1 16 101 0 3 2 1 0 681 2 4 2 1123 3 0.8 5.06 0 0.15 0.1 0.05 0 34.08 0.1 0.2 0.1 56.21 0.15 19 60 5 3 2 1 37 674 2 4 2 1126 3 0.95 3 0.25 0.15 0.1 0.05 1.85 33.75 0.1 0.2 0.1 56.38 0.15 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Welcome BBQ / PTA meeting September How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents are created in house in and translated in Chinese, Arabic, 1  Meet Your Advisor Night September PTA meetings (School leadership, DACA / DAPA, Road to College, Parent Appreciation) October, December, January, March, May Parent Teacher Conferences November / March and Spanish in house. Calls are made to parents using the DOE phone translation service one week before the event by student advisors. Documents are created in house in and translated in Chinese, Arabic, and Spanish in house. Calls are made to parents using the DOE phone translation service one week before the event by student advisors. We use DOE intranet translated templates for covered languages, and in house documents in Arabic, Spanish and Chinese when necessary. We use translation vendor when needed. We use DOE intranet translated templates for covered languages, and in house documents in Arabic, Spanish and Chinese when necessary. We use translation vendor when needed. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings PTA meetings Throughout the year Parent Teacher Conferences November / March IEP / 504 Meeting Throughout the Year Post suspension re-entry parent meetings Throughout the year Weekly parent outreach phone calls Weekly How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use bilingual staff or parent volunteers when available first and foremost, including, Spanish, Arabic, and Mandarin. Outside vendors are used when languages are not available. Advisors and staff supply ENL coordinator and LAC staff with schedules and preferred languages 2 weeks ahead of time. Meetings are scheduled using bilingual staff and DOE vendors for on-site translation. We use bilingual staff as needed. Over-the-phone interpretation is used when in person translation is not available. We use bilingual staff as needed. Over the phone interpretation is used when in person translation is not available. We use bilingual staff or over-the-phone translation service. For low-incidence messages we use Kinvolved to track attendances and lateness 2  Individual ENL parent meetings Throughout the year New admit intake interviews Throughout the year while also messaging families in their preferred languages which is a service provided by Kinvolved. We use bilingual staff as needed. Over-the-phone interpretation is used when in person translation is not available. We use bilingual staff as needed, including our designated bilingual Guidance Counselor. Over-the-phone interpretation is used when in person translation is not available. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. To reach out to parents in emergencies who speak our high-incidence languages, we use our bilingual staff (a majority of our support staff who work in the office are bilingual in English and Spanish). For low-incidence languages not spoken by the staff, we use the over-the-phone translation service provided by the DOE as well as additional contacts on the Blue Emergency Card. In addition, Kinvolved, a communication application used by our school, also allows the school to text parents via phone or computer and the messages are translated into the preferred language. Parents wishing to contact the school in case of an emergency can call directly. The phone instructions are in English and Spanish. A parent may leave a message and the staff will return the call with the necessary translation of the parent using the over-the-phone translation service provided by the DOE as well as additional contacts on the Blue Emergency Card. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our Language Access Coordinator, Lisa Lugo, distributes the Language Palm card and the Translation and Interpretation Brochure to all staff members at the beginning of the year and again before Parent-Teacher Conferences. Another document, with all necessary translation resources including phone numbers, links, and FAQs from information gathered from DOE Intranet, is made available and reviewed with all staff at the beginning of the year school-wide orientation. These documents ensure that staff are aware of the goals of translation as well as have the resources and tools needed to meet these outcomes. The school also has posters from the Translation & Interpretation Unit displayed in the front lobby and other offices of the school so parents know to seek translation if needed. All teachers get a copy of the "I speak.." reference card to ensure ease of communication. Additionally, each year, the LAC updates a school-wide Google document that 3  documents staff language abilities. If no teacher is available the staff utilizes the Translation and Interpretation hotline or on-site translations for one on one meetings like parent teacher conferences. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) To ensure our limited-English proficient parents are aware of their rights, signs are posted in high-visibility areas and offices that indicate the availability of language services in our high and low-incident languages, Spanish, Arabic, and Chinese. Parents will also receive written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services through distribution of the Parent Bills of Rights and the Family Guide provided in the appropriate language. This information is disseminated in our beginning of the year packet and again during PTA meetings. In addition, all Advisors call their Advisees’ families in the first week of school and use the Translation Unit when needed. During this introduction of family and Advisor, the Advisor discusses the language and contact preferences of the home and ensures the family that any necessary methods of translation will be used (Kinvolved app, over-the-phone translation services, bilingual staff, and/or translated documentation.) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We use the following methods to gather feedback on the language services provided to parents: Beginning in the 16-17 school year a T & I interpretation services survey was given to parents at the start of the year. Informal observations and conversations with students, teachers and parents are tracked and analyzed and this parent communication documentation is shared from grade to grade each year/ semester. In this way, Teachers, Advisors, Counselors, Advisory Point Leaders, Parent Coordinator, Community Leaders, and other staff can continually improve ways for bi-directional communication with parents. For example, to meet all needs, the school initiated use of Kinvolved which allows for textual over-the-phone communication where the message is translated into language of choice or the receivers of the messages whether this is parent or teacher. 4 
