2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 19K678 School Name: EAST NEW YORK MIDDLE SCHOOL OF EXCELLENCE Principal: MALIK SMALL 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information East New York Middle School of Excellence 331900010678 6,7,8 605 Shepherd Ave. Brooklyn, NY 11208 School Number (DBN): 19K678 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 718-257-4061 Phone Number: 718-257-4738 Fax: Mr. MalikA. Small msmall2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 19 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Mr. Malik A. Small Ms. Mary Marks Ms. Gregory Grant Ms. KristelSpencer Mr. DupreeMcleod EsmereldaCotto NA JermalWilson District Information Dr. Thomas McBryde. Jr Superintendent: 557 Pennsylvania Avenue TMcbryde@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-240-2700 Phone Number: 718-240-2741 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Brooklyn North FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Bernadette Fitzgerald Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 bfitzg2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 719-935-3954 Phone Number: Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nancy Dominique Mary Marks Gregory Grant KristelSpencer DupreeMcleod EsmereldaCotto JermalWilson Colette Grant Joyce Hogg Laura Shepherd *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Name Christine Parades Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Section 4: SCEP Overview The East New York Middle School of Excellence is committed to the principles of social justice. We believe that through self-determination, we can inspire the East New York community to act on its convictions to affirm its right to a quality education. Our students will cherish and preserve their ethnic and cultural identity, will serve and determine the future of our community, and will have a passion for peace, justice and the dignity of all people. By nurturing our students socially, emotionally, cognitively and culturally, our students will graduate high school, prepared for college and career. Vision The East New York Middle School of Excellence is committed to the principles of social justice. We believe that through self-determination, we can inspire the East New York community to act on its convictions to affirm its right to a quality education. Our students will cherish and preserve their ethnic and cultural identity, will serve and determine the future of our community, and will have a passion for peace, justice and the dignity of all people. By nurturing our students socially, emotionally, cognitively and culturally, our students will graduate high school, prepared for college and career. Credo We are East New York Middle School of Excellence. Our pride lies in our resilience. We are leaders. We are achievers. We fly above the rest. Never settle for less. Doing what it takes; Learning from our mistakes; Never giving up, giving in; Always surviving and thriving to win. Through dedication and determination We will soar regardless of the test, Success without excuses, Means I will always do my best. 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. East New York Middle School of Excellence is a middle school with 270 students from grade 6 through grade 8. In 2018-2019, the school population comprises 4% Asian, 59% Black, 37% Hispanic, and 0% White students. The average attendance rate for the school year 2018-2019 was 92.2%. The chronic absenteeism rate is 29%. ENYMSE Title I population is 78%. The school's free lunch population is 75%. The Limited English Proficiency population is 10%. And, Students with Disabilities comprise 24% of our population. Scholars enjoy the individual attention they receive at East New York Middle School of Excellence (E.N.Y.M.S.E.). At E.N.Y.M.S.E., our motto is "Success Without Excuses" and our scholars are held to that expectation every day. Scholars are able to pursue their education in a safe and nurturing environment. Our school offers a comprehensive coding program to all scholars and we are going into our 3rd year of implementation of a Software Engineering Program grant. Coding units include video gaming, app creation and robotics, all of which take place in our state-of-the-art technology lab. Scholars learn multiple coding languages, which include HTML, Java Script and Python. Additionally, ENYMSE integrates a minimum of two nine week S.T.E.M. units into our science classes at each grade level through partnerships which include Seeds for Trees and The Salvadori Center. We enrich these programs through strategic partnerships and trips for our scholars. All of our scholars are involved in an array of clubs and teams which allow them to explore pursuits outside of their academic interest. Our after-school program further enriches their experience through academics, sports and the arts. Parents enjoy the small school experience where each scholar has an Morning Star Coach (adviser). Morning Star coaches know each scholar on a personal basis and are committed to each scholars' academic, social, and emotional success. We are committed to a strong parent-school partnership and meeting the diverse needs of each individual scholar. Every scholar at E.N.Y.M.S.E. will be involved in community service before they graduate and all of our scholars will enter high-school prepared for success. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The student body includes 11% English Language Learners and 25% students with disabilities. Boys account for 51% of the students enrolled and girls account for 49%. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Effective Leadership: The school leader is continuing to use data to monitor and inform school wide academic intervention initiatives such Extended Learning Time and other targeted academic interventions. The principal has put systems in place to regularly evaluate and adjust CEP goals, school culture, assessment practices (targeted students), parental engagement, curricular and instructional practices in response to student learning needs and progress towards goals. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers engage in structured collaboration on teams to analyze assessment data and student work, which can impact teacher pedagogy and practice, planning, and progress towards goals for students. 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  Supportive Environment: The leader continues to partner with the Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility to train staff to conduct restorative circles. Additionally, the school has increased enrollment in after-school program that provide students with extracurricular activities such as band and access to competitive teams, including track, chess, rugby and rugby. Key area of focus for this school year: Rigorous Instruction: Teachers are still not consistently across classrooms planning for and providing effective differentiated instruction and multiple entry points/ support to ensure all learners have access to learning and are appropriately challenged to demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in student work products. The teachers and school leader should will meet monthly to continually modify the curriculum to ensure that interdisciplinary units are developed that enhance student engagement and deepen students' understanding of both the ELA and social studies curricula; and that learning targets, tasks, and assessments are grade-appropriate and enable all students to develop and demonstrate grade-level knowledge and skills in both subjects. Strong Family-Community Ties: The principal will work collaboratively with the Parent Coordinator and Community School Director (CSD) to foster parent empowerment as measured by a 60% parent participation rate in our Parent Empowerment Menu of activities. Although the school has created limited opportunities for parents to partner with the school community, the school will now offer a comprehensive list of varying opportunities for parent empowerment and partnership with the school community. The school leader will ensure that translators are available at all school meetings and events and all home-school communications are accessible to non-English speaking families through all modalities. The school leader identified parental involvement as an area in need of improvement. Both teachers and parents reported that families need more training on how to support the school in improving student outcomes. To help families develop the skills necessary to support student progress, the school leader will need to work with the parent coordinator, Community School Director and the Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) to plan a calendar of parental events, such as curriculum nights, science fairs, and math and reading workshops, to familiarize parents with grade-level expectations and provide them with strategies to use at home to advance student learning. 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K678 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 253 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 11 11 6 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 2 N/A 10 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 87.4% % Reduced Lunch 10.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 37.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.17 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 20.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A YSH NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 58 58 91.0% 3.2% 27.7% 57.7% 2.8% 0.0% 2 21% 8.6 10.6% 9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 14  2018-19 SCEP-P 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Many of curriculum and academic tasks submitted for review emphasized elements of rigorous habits and higher order thinking skills. Our staff has ensured that curricula are aligned to CCLS and/or content standards, integrated the instructional shifts, and made purposeful decisions to build coherence and promote college and career readiness for students as evidenced by the scope and sequence and unit plans provided. Curriculum is developed by the teachers and supplemented with Engage NY as a support for alignment to the CCLS and have various built in assessment supported through ANET. Social justice themes are evident within the curriculum and are aligned to the schools goals. The immediate impact of the curriculum design can lead to student owernership , complex text exposure, rich and deep discussion facilitated by students. The school over time. It is recommended that you create a system/ structure/ form to track and monitor the progress towards the CEP goals and targeted students. Provide and post the goals (make visible) so that all stakeholders (SLT) are clear about the school goals and the progress towards them (data) at intervals so that everyone is able to see/determine if you are on track to meet the goals to plan next steps. (2017-2018 PPO). 2018-19 SCEP-P 16  Priority Needs: Teachers are still not consistently across classrooms planning for and providing effective differentiated instruction and multiple entry points/ support to ensure all learners have access to learning and are appropriately challenged to demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in student work products. (2017-2018 PPO). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the grade level teams will work collaboratively to develop lesson/unit plans that have differentiated short-term learning outcomes and rigorous task which provide students regular engagement with higher order thinking as measured by a 10% increase in students scoring at Levels 3 & 4 on the English Language Arts and Mathematics exams. 2018-19 SCEP-P 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) ELA & Mathematics teacher teams in collaboration with Legacy Pathways, will utilize UDL to revise curriculum and embed differentiated learning outcomes and tasks. All Students, Sep.2018 -June 2019 SWD Principal, A.P.,, Instructional Coach, Lead teacher team, Legacy Pathways, iReady Legacy Pathways will provide coaching, curriculum support and model lessons for ELA & Mathematics teachers. The coach will debrief with each teacher and provide specific, actionable feedback. School leaders will monitor the implementation of coach's recommendations and provide support as needed. Administrative team will provide professional in UDL and SDI and resources for ELA& Mathematics teachers to use when developing differentiated outcomes and tasks for their students. ELA teachers will work in PLC’s to ensure vertical alignment of curriculum to better prepare students for the rigor of the common core. All Students Oct.2018 -June 2019 PLCs will meet on a weekly basis to analyze data, modify curriculum based on data analysis, create differentiated rigorous tasks. We will train educational assistants in strategies for scaffolding, spiraling, and providing students with multiple entry points to access differentiated tasks into the ELA & Mathematics curriculum. SWDs Sep.2018-June 2019 The use of instructional scaffolds to provide multiple entry points for students at differing levels of readiness is a school-wide instructional expectation, and a specific point of emphasis in ELA classrooms. Principal, A.P.,, Instructional Coach, Lead teacher team, Legacy Pathways, iReady Principal, A.P.,, Instructional Coach, Lead teacher team, Legacy Pathways, iReady We will utilize Legacy Pathways and an instructional coach to provide continuous professional development to the ELA & Mathematics team in order to facilitate increasing student rigor in All students Sep.2018 -June 2019 Principal, A.P.,, Instructional Coach, Lead teacher team, 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  work products, student reflections, tracking of, and ownership of differentiated learning across content areas. Legacy Pathways, iReady 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In engaging families to support students' understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home, by February 2019, the School Leader, Parent Coordinator and technology specialist will:  Utilize Skedula, School Cnxt, and the school website to communicate with parents in English, Spanish, Bengali and Arabic  Ensure that translators are available at all school meetings and events  All home-school communications are accessible to non-English speaking families through all modalities  Plan a calendar of parental events, such as curriculum nights, science fairs, and math and reading workshops, to familiarize parents with grade-level expectations and provide them with strategies to use at home to advance student learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, A.P. Instructional Coach, Special Education Coordinator, Lead teacher, Parent coordinator, Legacy Pathways,iReady common planning periods, Professional Development, Data Inquiry Team meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of the use of differentiated learning outcomes and tasks, we will see a 10% increase target Common Core Learning Standards on the Achievement Network ELA interim assessment data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. IReady diagnostic and adaptive assessments data, Interim Assessments, and CCLS aligned common assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: According to the 2017-2018 New York City School Survey Report, 89% of students feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and cafeteria. To improve school culture and climate, the school partnered with the Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility to develop and implement a restorative practices program, shifting the school’s behavior management approach to an increasingly restorative and PBIS driven culture. The director of student affairs position has changed to the Restorative Practices Coordinator and the role modified to encompass more social-emotional supports for students, such as the recognition and celebration of positive student behaviors. Priority Needs: 2018-19 SCEP-P 20  Conversely, in the supportive environment section of the 2017-2018 New York City School Survey Report, only 33% of students feel of students say that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate other students at their school. . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the principal will work collaboratively with the Morningside Center to implement an evidence based Social Emotional Learning/ Restorative Practice (SEL/RP) curriculum which provides academic & social emotional support for students as measured by a 10% decrease in male students receiving Superintendent’s Suspensions. 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide professional development to all stake-holders and Restorative Practices & School Culture Team on strategies to instill core values in students and to incentives and celebrate students who exemplify these values. The Restorative Practices & School Culture Team will consist of the principal. restorative practices coordinator, community school director, teachers, school aides and student representatives. Chronically Absent Students Sep. 2018 -June 2019 Man Up! will meet weekly with at-risk males to develop student capacity to self-regulate their own behavior. Chronically Absent Students Sep. 2018 -June 2019 Community School Director and My Brothers' Keeper liaison will facilitate male mentoring programs. Chronically Absent Students Sep. 2018 -June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, A.P., Community School Director, School Counselor, Social Worker, Crisis Intervention Counselor, Parent Coordinator, Restorative Practices Coordinator, Student Representatives, Man Up CBO Principal, A.P., Community School Director, School Counselor, Social Worker, Crisis Intervention Counselor, Parent Coordinator, Restorative Practices Coordinator, Student Representatives, Man Up CBO Principal, A.P., Community School Director, School Counselor, Social Worker, Crisis Intervention Counselor, Parent Coordinator, Restorative Practices Coordinator, Student Representatives, Man Up CBO 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  We will utilize the School Counselor, Social Worker for at risk-counseling. Chronically Absent Students Sep. 2018 -June 2019 School Counselor, Social Worker 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In working to engage families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support their children at home, by October 2018, the School Leader Parent Coordinator and technology specialist will:  Plan a calendar of parental events which include activities to engage parents in preventing chronic absenteeism  Utilize Skedula, School Cnxt, and the school website to communicate with parents in English, Spanish, Bengali and Arabic  Ensure that translators are available at all school meetings and events  All home-school communications are accessible to non-English speaking families through all modalities Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, A.P. Community School Director, School Counselor, Social Worker, Parent Coordinator, Restorative Practices & School Culture Team. Office of Community Schools. SCO Family of Services (Lead CBO), Man Up!, e.g. celebrations, trips, etc. and Expanded Learning Time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Along with weekly monitoring of OORS data we expect to see a 10% decrease in male suspensions by February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measurement will be OORS. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: According to a 2018-201 Principal Performance Observation, teachers engage in structured collaboration on teams to analyze assessment data and student work, which can impact teacher pedagogy and practice, planning, and progress towards goals for students. Priority Needs: In seeking to increase the impact of teacher instructional practices as measured by a 10% increase in students scoring at or above proficiency on the Common Core English Language Arts& Mathematics State Assessment, we will convene an equity steering committee which consist of the principal, lead teacher team, SPED coordinator and ELL coordinator to build teacher capacity in including SDI in their unit/lesson plans and provide multiple entry points for SPED and ELL students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Special Education Instructional team will work collaboratively using and analyzing Individualized Educational Plan (IEP) data to create Specially Designed Instruction (SDI) for students with disabilities (SWDs), as measured by a 20% increase in students progressing one performance level on the NYS ELA exam. 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Members of the equity steering committee will provide targeted support to teachers in the the areas of SDI and ELL support. All students Sep.2018 -June 2019 All students Sep.2018 -June 2019 Principal, AP, ELL Coordinator and SPED Coordinator will provide teachers with professional development SDI creation and equity practices for SPED and ELL students. Principal will ensure that all lesson plans contain SDI that addresses the specific needs of individual SPED students. All students Sep.2018 -June 2019 Equity Steering Committee will engage in learning walks to support peer feedback in the areas of SDI and ELL support and lead teachers will turnkey committee goals to grade level teams. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All students Sep.2018 -June 2019 SWD Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, A.P. Lead Teacher Team, SPED Coordinator, ELL Coordinator Principal, A.P. Lead Teacher Team, SPED Coordinator, ELL Coordinator Principal, A.P. Lead Teacher Team, SPED Coordinator, ELL Coordinator Principal, A.P. Lead Teacher Team, SPED Coordinator, ELL Coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In engaging families to support students' understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations in order to support their children at home, by October 2017, the School Leader, Parent Coordinator, School Leadership Team (SLT) and technology specialist will: SLT will collaboratively to engage parents in strategies to support their children at home   Utilize Skedula, School Cnxt, and the school website to communicate with parents in English, Spanish, Bengali and Arabic 2018-19 SCEP-P 26   Ensure that translators are available at all school meetings and events  All home-school communications are accessible to non-English speaking families through all modalities  Plan a calendar of parental events, such as curriculum nights, science fairs, and math and reading workshops, to familiarize parents with grade-level expectations and provide them with strategies to use at home to advance student learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, A.P. Peer, Restorative Practices Coordinator, Community School Director, Parent coordinator, common planning periods, Professional Development, Data Inquiry Team meetings. Humanities & Math Team. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, there will be a 10% increase in teachers rated Effective or Highly Effective in Component 3c and we will see a 10% increase in students progressing a minimum of one year's growth in ELA & Mathematics as measured by iReady data . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance and iReady diagnostic Assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: According to the 2018-2019 School Survey, 100% of families feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school. Priority Needs: Conversely, only 62% of teachers surveyed say that they have influence over the selection of instructional materials used in classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  By June 2019, school leaders will develop and implement a Professional Development Plan aligned to the Universal Design for Learning Framework (UDL), which enhances teachers’ capacity to appropriately differentiate for individual learners, as measured by a 20% increase in students who score at Level 3 & 4 on both the NYS ELA & NYS Mathematics assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The principal and A.P. and Legacy Pathways consultants will provide professional development in the use of UDL to make immediate adjustments to planning & teaching and learning in the classroom. Pedagogical Staff Sep. 2018 -June 2019 Pedagogical Staff Oct.2018 -June 2019 Professional learning teams will utilize interim assessment, iready and teacher designed assessment data to support building capacity of teachers in creating SDI and differentiating for individuals and groups of students. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, A.P. Instructional Coach, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Humanities Team, Legacy Pathways & iReady & G&R Consultants Principal, A.P. Instructional Coach, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Humanities Team, Legacy Pathways & iReady & G&R Consultants Professional learning teams will utilize the "Looking at data through student work" and "UDL Now" to utilize student assessment data to drive differentiated planning. Professional learning teams will utilize the text "UDL Now" to guide their work.  Setting up schedules for inter-visitations to share best practices with the use of differentiated questioning and discussion techniques. Instructional coach will facilitate specialized training, including instructional aides (paraprofessionals). 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  School leaders will also create and implement a professional development plan that builds teachers’ capacity and hones their leadership skills. Principal will build capacity in grade team leaders. Through frequent cycles of observation and feedback and the use of the Danielson Framework, administration will identify teachers’ strengths and areas in need of improvement in order to provide targeted feedback and support. Provide SLT and PTA with leadership training. Pedagogical Staff Sep.2018 -June 2019 Principal, A.P. SLT & PTA Sep. 2018 - June 2019 Principal, A.P., Parent Coordinator, Community School Director, Community Associate 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In engaging families to support students' understanding of Effective School Leadership and Strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home, by October 2017, the School Leader, Parent Coordinator, School Leadership Team (SLT) and technology specialist will:  Provide SLT and PTA with leadership training.   Utilize Skedula, School Cnxt, and the school website to communicate with parents in English, Spanish, Bengali SLT will collaboratively to engage parents in strategies to support their children at home and Arabic  Ensure that translators are available at all school meetings and events  All home-school communications are accessible to non-English speaking families through all modalities  Plan a calendar of parental events, such as curriculum nights, science fairs, and math and reading workshops, to familiarize parents with grade-level expectations and provide them with strategies to use at home to advance student learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, A.P. Instructional Coach, Special Education Coordinator, Lead teacher, G&R, Legacy Pathways, iReady common planning periods, Professional Development, Data Inquiry Team meetings. Humanities Team Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, 100% of teachers will be rated Effective or Highly Effective in component 4d, Participating in the Professional Community, in Advance, as a result of consistent participation in school inquiry teams. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYCDOE Advance System, iReady & frequent cycles of observation and feedback. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 100% 0f families say that school staff work hard to build trusting relationships with families like them. Priority Needs: Conversely, only 79% of students say that their teachers will always listen to students' ideas. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  By June 2019, the principal will work collaboratively with the Parent Coordinator and Community School Director (CSD) to foster parent empowerment as measured by a 60% parent participation rate in our Parent Empowerment Menu of activities. 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Family Literacy and Educational workshops and information on academic policy. Monthly parent workshops will include Title 1 information and school progress towards meeting academic goals. There will be a minimum of 10 workshops conducted for the year. Attendance will be taken at every meeting and there will be an agenda that will identify discussion topics. Produce a monthly calendar that articulates scheduled events that encourage the participation of all stakeholders indicating the Four Parent Conferences – September, November, March, and May. Parents, teachers, and school community Sep.2018 -June 2019 Sep.2018 -June 2019 Parents, teachers, and school community Principal, AP, Parent Coordinator, Community School Director, Community Associate, Community Assistant Principal, AP, Parent Coordinator, Community School Director, Community Associate, Community Assistant Create a menu of differentiated parental involvement activities that are culturally responsive to the changing demographics of our community. School Cnxt System will be utilized to provide school community with alerts regarding important school announcements. Notices will be distributed in multiple languages to ensure access for all parents. This system will be utilized when necessary to announce school closings, progress reports and report card dates and any pertinent information that needs to be communicated. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Sep.2018 -June 2019 Parents, teachers, and school community Principal, AP, Parent Coordinator, Community School Director, Community Associate, Community Assistant If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Office of Community Schools SCO Family of Services Family Dynamics Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  Principal, A.P. , Community School Director, Parent Coordinator, Community Associate, Community Assistant, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 10% increase in parental involvement as measured by monitored activities on the school-wide communication system, (Pupil Path), parent attendance at school events and parent volunteer log. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC School Survey, Pupil Path, School Cnxt, Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 20189, there will be a 10% increase in students achieving proficiency on the NYS Mathematics assessment. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Participation will be encouraged through partnering with parents, caregivers and the community to encourage students to participate in ELT. We will confer with individual and groups of students to review and facilitate the tracking of their academic data. Additionally, we will incentive and celebrate participation. Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. The Leadership Team will conduct a needs assessment of the ELT program to ensure alignment between programs, student needs and clear student achievement outcomes. We will integrate our academic courses and ELT through the use of CCLS-aligned curricula in the core academic subjects, LOTE, technology offerings, arts and physical education. Students in need of academic courses for graduation will be programmed for these courses and their families notified. Students who are in need of tutoring or serve as tutors will have the opportunity as well. Enrichment Clubs, including debate, robotics, chess, musical theater, track, and flag footbal, will be offered and available to every 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  ENYMSE student. These clubs will afford students the opportunity to extend their academic learning, and to improve social and emotional outcomes in a supportive environment. Additionally, students will have the opportunity to participate in academic extended days, as well as additional mathematics and ELA offerings during holidays and Saturdays. ENYMSE teachers will facilitate all clubs and ELT courses. Outreach to parents, caregivers and the community will be facilitated by the Parent Coordinator, Community Associate, Community Assistant and teachers on a continuous basis. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. The Leadership Team will oversee the ELT Program. The program will be implemented by ENYMSE teachers. Outreach as well as attendance and monitoring will be facilitated by the Parent Coordinator, Community School Director, Community Associate, Community Assistant and teachers on a continuous basis. Administrators will monitor and evaluate the program through informal observations to assess impact and will provide actionable feedback to teachers. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Planning and baselining, will occur in September 2018, followed by implementation in October 2018 through June 2019. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program.  Principal, A.P. Instructional Coach, mathematics teachers, Community School Director, Parent Coordinator, Community Associate, Community Assistant, and teachers. Students schedule will be adjusted to incorporate extended learning time. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X P/F Set-aside X SIG Grant School X Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 10% increase in math scores as measured by the periodic analysis of iReady diagnostic assessment data. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  iReady diagnostic and adaptive learning modules. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) At-risk services (e.g. provided by Anecdotal records (Skedula), analyzing Students and family counseling will be provided Small group   One to one 2018-19 SCEP-P 40 Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students that are Level 1 or 2 on the NYS English Language Arts Common Core Exam Students that are Level 1 or 2 on the NYS Mathematics Common Core Exam Students that are scoring Level 1 or 2 on monthly/quarterly Performance tasks Students that are scoring Level 1 or 2 periodic Performance tasks  Guided Reading   Groups Interim Assessments iReadyDiagnostic assessements Fluency Testing   Myon  One-on-One group  tutoring Interim Assessments  District level common assessments iReadydiagnostic Assessments   Khan Academy  Smart Science  iReadyAssessments, guided reading groups, independent reading, student-teacher conferences Small group   One-to one tutoring After School from 2:30 PM to 3:30 PM  WholeGroup Small group   One-to one tutoring  Whole Group Small group   One-to one tutoring  Whole Group Small group   One-to one After School from 2:30 PM to 3:30 PM After School from 2:30 PM to 3:30 PM Before School tutoring  Whole Group After School from 2:30 PM to 3:30 PM During School the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) marking period grades, family outreach, OORS reports, and attendance data  Home visits Before School After School from 2:30 PM to 3:30 PM by Principal, A. P. guidance Counselors, Director, of Student Support Services, Instructional Coach, Special Education Coordinator, Morning Star Coach. Students will receive counseling on a broad range of issues aligned to morning side restorative justice program and implementation. Including issues surrounding academic services, attendance, drop out prevention, study habits, substance abuse depression, anxiety and other social emotional issues. 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) The number of students in our school in temporary housing is 23. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The services we provide to this population include support with school uniforms, book bags, and school supplies. Students' counseling needs will be addressed by the mandated guidance counselor and social worker in partnership with the Institute for Community Living. Outreach from Community School Director and social worker. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Attending professional development monthly meeting with superintendent and district colleagues Attend monthly Achievement Network professional learning sessions with a focus Conduct a needs assessment of teachers, paraprofessionals, and support staff aligned to CCLS Provide professional learning opportunities according to needs assessment identified in data evaluation. Teachers will participate in professional learning opportunities aligned to the content Area calendars Participating in Webinars Small Group trainings Individual School Support Demo Lessons Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers meet collaboratively for common planning, curricula revision, and to analyze data through student work. During these meetings, teachers develop SMART goals and participate in action planning around choosing and developing assessments based on student data. Teachers meet in concert with the Principal, A.P. and Instructional Coach during these meetings. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column B Column A Title I Part A (Basic) Federal $233,913.00 Verify with an (X) X Section Reference(s) 5 A,B,C,D,E, 2018-19 SCEP-P 45 Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal $0 $69,433.00 $0 $0 $0 $2,339,839.00 Tax Levy (FSF) Local X X 6,7,89 5 A,B,C,D,E 6,7,8,9 5 A,B,C,D,E 6,7,8,9 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 2018-19 SCEP-P 46   Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 47  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The East New York Middle School of Excellence, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The East New York Middle School of Excellence will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) The East New York Middle School of Excellence, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service SCO Family of Services Family Dynamics Epiphany Blue Man Up! Morningside Center Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Chronically Absent/Late Students After-School Students Teachers & Staff At-Risk Students All Students Health & Wellness, Mindfulness Restorative Practices SY18-19 SMART Goal Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA P/F Set-aside PTA Funded X SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 19 School Name East New York Middle School of Excellenc Borough Brooklyn School Number 678 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mr. Malik A. Small Coach Ms. Lesley Thomas ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Desiree Sandoval Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Samantha Gathers Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Dawne Martin Thomas Related-Service Provider Superintendent Mr. Edwin HernandezSPED Coordi Assistant Principal Mr. SukKu Lee Coach Mr. A. Roman DeLeon School Counselor Ms. Magaret Moran/ELA Parent Ms. Lesley Orinkawitz/ELA Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) 1 C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 0 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 261 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 12 Total number of ELLs 4.60% ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.38% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): SELECT ONEYesNo If yes, indicate language(s): SELECT ONEYesNo Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Lang. Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 Results from benchmark exams will be used as data to inform the instruction of the ESL teacher. Targeting the specific skills, as per the data, will allow the ESL teacher to provide differentiated instruction and meet the individual needs of the students. Weekly conferencing with ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies 0 2018-19 SCEP-P 59  coaches will assist the ESL teacher in analyzing data to improve instruction. The ESL teacher will be supported by the instructional team and will seek support, if needed, through the office of English Language Learners. Performance Series Scantrons are used to assess literacy and math skills of all ELL’S. Students are scantroned each marking period to determine and monitor student growth. This information allows administration and teachers to determine individual Ell’s next steps. Furthermore, Ell’s data from school wide quarterly benchmark assessments in each content area are extracted and analyzed in an effort to further understand individual student growth or deficiencies. Instructors disaggregated and use the data to find areas of need and incorporate the finding in their instructions therefore, action plans are created in an effort to accelerate 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  0 0 0 0 0 0 Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 student learning. 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? ENYMSE evaluates the success of our ELLs by closely monitoring the nyseslat scores as well as Interim Assessments to analyze data. The ENL instructor also monitors student progress in their respective Humanities classes to inform instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? N/A 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Based on the assessment analysis, it is evident that reading and writing modalities are at a noticeably lower level than speaking and listening skills across proficiency levels and grades. These areas of deficiency are addressed in our after school program for ELL's. This after school program is instructed by the ESL teacher Mr. De Leon and Ms. Thomas, English teacher. Furthermore, it has been the trend that students who are eligible for services based on the NYSETELL, parents have selected the Freestanding ESL program here at MS 678. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 1. a. The ESL teacher provides with Integrated ESL Instruction four periods per week in collaboration with the child's ELA teacher where the style is a push-in model for an advanced student. Eight periods per week for a beginning and intermediate student. Students are serviced through ELA area. b. The program model consists of ungraded. Students are provided ESL services according to their NYSESLAT levels. Pull-out services are provided using this model. c. Beginning/Entering students receive a total of 360 minutes of instruction per week. The breakdown is as follows: 180 minutes of pull out model instruction on what is denominated as Stand Alone ESL Instruction and 180 minutes in collaboration with the ELA teacher ONLY in what is called Integraded ESL Instruction. d. Low Intermediate students receive a total of 360 minutes per week. The breakdown is as follows: 90 Minutes of Stand Alone ESL Instruction, 180 minutes in collaboration with the ELA teacher ONLY in what is called Integrated ESL Instruction and 90 minutes of optional Stand Alone or integrated with ELA or any other content area. e. Intermediate Transitioning students receive 180 minutes of instruction per week. The breakdown is as follows: 90 minutes Integrated ELA ONLY and 90 minutes of optional Stand Alone or integrated with ELA or any other content area. f. Advanced/Expanding students receive 180 minutes per week. The breakdown is as follows: 180 minutes Integrated ELA or 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  any other content area. g. Proficient/Commanding students receive 90 minutes per week. The breakdown is as follows: 90 minutes of optional Stand Alone or Integrated ELA or any other content area. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. N/A b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. The staff consists of a certified ESL teacher whose primary role is to service the ELL students in accordance to the mandated minutes required for each student. a.Explicit ESL is delivered in each content area based upon the ESL teacher's collaboration with content area teachers. The teacher modifies the delivery of content according to the student needs. Additionally, the ESL teacher collaborates with ELA to provide instruction to meet the needs of the students. Students are provided services through a pull-out and push in programs. There are 12 Ell’s at the beginning and intermediate levels of English proficiency that receive eight periods of ESL instruction weekly. Therefore, based upon student proficiency levels, ELL students will receive 360 minutes per week as required under CR Part 154. During this time frame students will be involved in complex learning and critical thinking skills and tasks. Academic Language and discourse, along with benchmarks of scaffolding activities, would be the evidentiary indicator. Under the new regulation CR 154, Mr. De Leon goes to the four different classess to push in four periods each week to comply with the mandate. These classes which have ELLs assigned, are as follow: 602, 603, 604, and 703. In each of these classes Mr. De Leon participates mostly with their ELA subject for the sixth grade ELLS and a combined service in ELA and Math for 703, these sevices are as mandated spreading in a total of four periods for each class while pushing in. In addition, all ELLs get serviced on a pull-out model receiving the same amount of periods where children paricipate coming to Mr De Leon's class. During this service children come at different times so there is not interfeering with math, according to their regular schedule children get pull out in a varierity of subject classes to minimize the impact of not being while subject teachers instruct. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Literacy instruction is aligned with the New York State Common Core ELA Standards and New York City ELA Performance Standards and is designed to provide a solid foundation in the acquisition of literacy skills in order to prepare our students for high school and to meet the challenges of our informational and technological 21st century. By using Pearson CC curriculum, our belief in a comprehensive literacy approach will continue to lead us to create an environment where our teachers instruct our students in the strategies good readers use before, during and after reading through modeling, thinking aloud, use of graphic organizers, mini-lessons, and higher order critical thinking skills. The program includes the components of balanced literacy. 2018-19 SCEP-P 62  Math instruction is aligned with the New York State Common Core Math Standards and New York City Math Performance Standards and is designed to provide a solid foundation in basic math and algebraic skills in order to prepare our students for high school and to meet the challenges of our informational and technological 21st century. Math CC curriculum supported by resources such as Pearson Mathematics and New York State Coach. The math curriculum and pacing are aligned with New York State Department of Education Mathematics Standards. Our science program is aligned with New York State Learning Standards for Mathematics, Science, and Technology (MST) for the living environment and the physical setting and also with the New York City Science performance standards. It is designed to provide a solid foundation in the areas of life, physical and earth science. The NYS Grade Eight Assessment, demands knowledge in all three of the above noted areas. It represents the current New York City spiraling curriculum taught in grades 6-8. Our Social Studies is aligned with the New York State Social Studies Core Curriculum and the New York City Performance Standards. Our students study World History and American History. In addition, the core knowledge social studies curriculum represents further instruction in world and American history and geography using traditional or basic social studies knowledge. ELL students have a student program which allows them to participate in each subject area during the school day inclusive of classroom instruction and activities. Teachers are encouraged to have the ELL students present in their subject area classes to work cooperatively with one or two students during the work period. The strategies utilized in with the ELL's include the Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach (CALLA), which is an instructional model developed to meet the academic needs of students learning ESL. CALLA integrates academic language development, content area instruction, and explicit instruction in learning strategies for both content and language acquisition. In addition Milestones will be used to develop better skills with our ELLs when dealing with reading and writing comprehension. Also, the SIOP model is utilized when appropriate to enhance the learning methods to all ELLs. All of these methods/programs are utilized by Mr. De Leon at his discretion to create engaging lessons. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Mr. De Leon administers an assessment to newcomers who speak any other language than English and who speak their native language at home in order to determine their dominance of the language. Mr De Leon also does informally evaluates Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, and French speakers literary throughtout the year and provides reading material to ELLs to encourage their native language development. Since reasearch has found out and has shown that native language literacy development is strongly correlated with second language literacy achievment. It is also a service to any student who speak any language other than the aforementioned. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All ELLs are given an assessment test to define their actual level of knowledge as they enter the school. Students who are already identified as ELLs and that have been in the system, are analyzed and placed according to their NYSESLAT results. The four components are taken in consideration to plan and differentiate their instruction. Currently there is a SIFE student identified based on the assessement provided by Mr. De Leon and as per indications from the CR 154 regulations, all teachers including Mr. De Leon will work with the child to develop a plan to bring the student up to grade level in all content areas as quickly as possible. Mr. De Leon will be providing intense one on one support to have the SIFE student develop in her native language literacy as well as math. When parents plan to be out of the country on extended vacations during the school year, ENYMSE throughout Mr. De Leon's intervention reaches out the family to discuss the importance of not missing school and, when necessary, works with them to provide the students with work in advance, so that students do not fall behind. Differentiation for the ELL students takes place both in the classroom and with ESL services. Additionally, teachers also provide support and enrichment during the day and after school program. During their push- in/pull-out services. Planning for ELL’s in the United States less than 3 years, includes coordinating with mainstream teachers for the purpose of becoming more aware of student needs. Also, they will be encourage to participate in the after school program in 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  preparation of the NYSESLAT. Ell’s who have been in the United States from 4- 6 years will participate in the day program with a focus on using literacy and language skills to enhance their academic skills as well as the after school program in preparation to the NYSESLAT The plan for ELL's who have been in the United States for 6 years will participate in afterschool programs with a focus on reading and writing skills to enhance their academic skills to advance student learning. Additionally, Ell’s with special needs receive additional time on test, push in support and specific instruction to meet academic needs. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The ESL teacher works closely with our Special Education Team and the ELL-SWD students themselves to develop Individualized Student Action Plans (ISAPs) to support ELL-SWD's goals and learning needs. The ESL and Special Education teachers work collaboratively to differentiate and scaffold instruction to ensure that ELL-SWD students are receiving comprehensible input in all content areas and developing their English language skills across all four modalities. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Each student is serviced through a Push-In model to ensure they work to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. Advanced ELLs would be pulled out one period a week and receive the rest of the mandate in a Push-In model in the majority of their ESL service to support them in their ELA classes. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Mr. De Leon will be assisting the ELL population while servicing them in a push in model collaborating with the content teachers to plan some of the lessons. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Constant monitoring of students plus collaboration among the content area teachers and the ENL teacher in order to benefit all ELLs. The new ENL teacher speaks fluent Spanish, has solid control of Portuguese, and can manage if necessary students who might speak Italian. this will provide ample opportunity to all the students who might have the languages mentioned as a home language. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? N/A 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The school will make sure that enough students register to the after school program in order to make learning more accessible to them. Offering the opportunity of extended hours will provide extra time for clarification of material provided during the day or for new material to challenge the already learned concept in any subject. Helping ELLs with homework will be taken in consideration also. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  Students have access to Smart boards, lap tops, Milestone books, internet programs found on the educational sections, visuals, textbooks, reading books selected according to ELLs levels. In the clasroom there are the following: a reading section, a listening section, writing models, (visuals) et cetera. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Mr. De Leon is fluent in Spanish, Portuguese, and usually finds helpful a program in Google which could be used with students translating to other languages aside from the aforementioned. The ESL teacher provides language support by translating instructions or unknown words into available language. Normally this strategy is utilized with Tier three words since they are the academic words which students basically have to memorize to identify their use in the specific science. Tier two words are taught using a series of strategies encouraged by Mr. De Leon, such as context clues, re-reading, et cetera. Cognate identification is stressed when teaching new vocabulary, predicting, presentation of grammatical rules and phonetic patterns. Students are encouraged to use their metacognitive abilities taking advantage of their first language by creating connections. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Exams are given to all students as a way to assess their level of knowledge. Students at entry point are placed according to their age in the appropriate grade level and then, if there is a deficiency in their academics, they are help throughout a scaffolding method to raise their level of knowledge academically. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students have access to Smart boards, lap tops, Milestone books, internet programs found on the educational sections, visuals, textbooks, reading books selected according to ELLs levels. In the clasroom there are the following: a reading section, a listening section, writing models, (visuals) et cetera. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Newly enrolled ELLs are provided with information sessions and orientation to help them acclimate to their new environment. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Spanish in order to assure that they learn it in an academic environment. It has been observed that their level of academic Spanish is very low. This is reflection of the lack of academic instruction in their first language, also it is presumably reflection of the level of language spoken in their household which may not be highly instructional. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We offer a strong professional development program for staff serving ELL’s. The ELL staff member has attended professional development offered through the Office of English Language Learners as well as in house professional development training to be exposed to best approach methodology, ESL Prototype, data analysis, comprehensive needs assessment, parental involvement, compliance and instructional issues, preparation for the NYSESLAT and program design. The ESL teacher will be afforded opportunities 2018-19 SCEP-P 65  to discuss current research, best practices, materials, NYS-ESL standards, instructional strategies, alignment to core curriculum, and the application of ESL prototype. All staff working with ELL's receive professional development from the administration, coaches and outside consultants. The following professional development schedule has been created for the 2015-2016 school year. (These workshops have been created to provide all staff members professional development for meeting the needs of our English Language Learners. Professional Development Schedule September 2015 -Opening Conference Identifying ELLs/Student Placement October 2015 ELL Data Review November 2015 Preparing for Parent/Teacher Conference; ELL Progress Reports; Engaging Parents December 2015 ELL Data Review: Planning for Student Success January 2016 Focus on Instructional Technology for ELLs/ Read 180/Achieve 3000 February 2016 Using strategies in the classroom to improve student achievement March 2016 Monitoring Student Progress in ELA/Math via Benchmarks April 2016 Preparing for the NYSESLAT May/June 2016 Comprehensive Mandated Training Series for Teachers of ELLs (7 ½ hrs) We provide support to staff to assist ELLs as they transition by having workshops on Qtel training and support from outside consultants. Furthermore, as the ELL's move on to High School, guidance counselors from receiving schools are notified and informed to continue the services received by our ELL population in an effort to provide continuity of services. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Approximately ninety (90) percent of our school Staff was provided with the Comprehensive Mandated Training Series for Teachers of ELL’s in August 2015 (7 ½ hrs traning) and new staff will have the same opportunity to complete the training. Our payroll secratery maintains the files and updates out table of organization to indicate those who have completed the training All attended PDs will be recorded and place in the teachers files accessible for viewing on demand. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Parents are invited to analyze and see their child's progress and are advised of the different methods utilized to improve their academics. 2018-19 SCEP-P 66  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are invited to come to the classroom whenever possible. Parents are invited to events such as brunches to have them get involved in our school community. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. N/A Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Malik Small 2018-19 SCEP-P 67 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, ENYMSE, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 68  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: 19K678 School DBN: Malik A. Small Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) 10/15/16 10/15/16 10/15/16 10/15/16 10/15/16 10/15/16 10/15/16 10/15/16 1/1/01 10/15/16 1/1/01 SPED Coordinator Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member 1/1/01 Other 10/15/16 Other 1/1/01 Other 1/1/01 Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) SukKu Lee Dawne Martin Thomas A. Roman DeLeon Samantha Gathers Magaret Moran/ELA Lesley Orinkawitz/ELA Lesley Thomas Desiree Sandoval Edwion Hernandez 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-P 69  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2018-19 SCEP-P 70  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 2018-19 SCEP-P 71  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 SCEP-P 72 
