 18K763 School Name: BROOKLYN SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING ACADEMY Principal: ANGELA DEFILIPPIS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Brooklyn Science and Engineering Academy 331800010763 6, 7 & 8 5404 Tilden Avenue 718-240-3790 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 18K763 718-240-3791 Fax: Angela DeFilippis adefilippis@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Angela DeFilippis RoseyanaSmith Tanya Melbourne & Shelley Worrell Patricia Fogarty SalmaGandour N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 18 Superintendent’s Office Address: Beverly A. Wilkins Superintendent: 1106 E. 95th St., Room 109, Brooklyn, NY 11236 BWilkin@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-566-6008 Phone Number: (718) 649-7074 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Mauricierede Govia Executive Director: 415 89th Street, Brooklyn, New York 11209 Mdegovi@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-240-3677 Phone Number: 718-759-4842 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Angela DeFilippis RoseyanaSmith Shelley Ann Worrell SalmaGandour N/A N/A Sylvia White *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ann Marie Forde Michelle Lee Patricia Fogarty Sadie Goldman ZanadeMann N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Brooklyn Science and Engineering Academy provides our students with learning experiences that prepare them to tackle the rigorous academic work of high school and beyond. Through small class sizes, open-communication with families, interest based crews, and academic coaching, we help our students to demonstrate excellence in all academic subject areas and through a unique foundation of learning experiences, which provides a strong foundation in Science, Technology, Engineering, Art and Math.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Brooklyn Science and Engineering Academy (BSEA) has begun its fifth year as a NYC public school that is located in East Flatbush, Brooklyn, NY. We have multiple partnerships that allow our students to have access to culturally rich institutions in New York City and STEAM experiences that provide them with engaging experiences. BSEA has been selected to be a New York City Showcase School. We are showcasing our work around developing and executing STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Art, and Math) instruction. Having the opportunity to share our best practices around STEAM curriculum development, pedagogy, and teacher teams as part of the Showcase process, we have been able to refine our practices to better engage the students who we serve. The Showcase process has provided us with learning partners from across the city to accomplish our school's mission to provide middle school students with a stellar STEAM education. Our current population consists of approximately 325 students, 94% African-American, 3% Hispanic, and 1% White. We are a STEAM-themed school that incorporates hands-on learning, collaboration with the Urban Advantage initiative, The United Nations Ambassador program, EverFi, and Virtual Enterprise, and Mosa Mack. These programs provide resources for students to think analytically about, develop solutions for real world problems and use critical thinking skills to develop and share theories and designs to solve future world problems. We implement the Ever Fi program, where students learn to create their own video games, complete with characters, settings, obstacles, and controls. The program emphasizes mathematics and literacy skills while fostering creativity and applied learning. Families are invited to the final class to see a presentation of final projects. We have been awarded a three year grant to have the SONYC after school program at BSEA. The SONYC program provides three hours of extra-curricular activities such as basketball, soccer, martial arts, visual art, and homework help Monday through Friday. Our CHAMPS program provides students with after-school extracurricular physical, social, and emotional development in the form of our sports program. Our students also have the opportunity to participate in visual arts and dance while at BSEA. We have teachers who believe in the mission and vision of BSEA. Our teachers participate in summer professional learning sessions that result in collaborative curricula planning and a collegial school community. We have been able to develop a shared instructional focus which requires students to support their assertions with evidence and further explain why their evidence supports their claims. To that end, we collaboratively developed three, more intensive, instructional foci: providing cognitively engaging tasks that are differentiated for all learners, checking for student understanding, and accountable talk. The inclusion of all staff members in developing unit templates and school systems and structures has resulted in a community of trust. This trust is exemplified by teachers voluntarily inter-visiting their colleagues’ classrooms and providing feedback on what they observed. Since we are a small school, we have and will continue to develop close relationships with BSEA families. We welcome families to visit during the school day. At parent outreach events, we survey families to better understand our students’ needs as well as particular challenges we may face as a community. In order to plan for learning challenges, we use the district, school wide, and individual student data. We also employ data analysis tools like Aimesweb and DRP to assess students’ development in reading and math. The vision of BSEA is to meet the needs of the community, and based on our enrollment, we feel we have met this need. Parents have shown more interest and involvement in students’ academic and extracurricular needs such as our after-school programs. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  8.2% of our population is in a self-contained setting, 4.8% is in an Integrated Co-Teaching setting, 2.7% receive SETSS, 4.1% are ENL. Our goal is to provide all students with the foundational skills needed to complete the rigorous coursework provided at BSEA. All students require assistance with accessing the foundational skills necessary for critical thinking. We have included an ASD (Autism Spectrum Disorders) Nest class on our 6th grade. We are providing students with ASD develop academic skills and social competencies. The NEST classroom provides a safe, inclusive environment where students are valued as individuals and learn alongside their peers while developing foundational skills for continued success in school. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2017-2018 school year, our school has made a 10.7% increase in the number of students who scored at the proficient level in English Language Arts (ELA), a 2.8% increase in the number of Students with Disabilities who scored proficient in ELA, and a 4.3% increase in Students with Disabilities scoring at proficient levels in mathematics. This data directly reflects our growth in providing students with rigorous instruction. We are waiting for the 2018 New York State testing data to be available. We have developed baseline, interim, and summative assessments to monitor and modify our instructional approach as it relates to ELA and math. Our ELA scores have shown a continuous improvement. From 2014 to 2017 we have had a 33% increase in ELA proficiency. Our math proficiency had a 14% increase from 2014 to 2017. We are focused on improving the foundational skills of our students as it relates to math. We will increase the number of periods that students receive math instruction for the 2018-2019 school year. All of our grade 8 students will have the opportunity to sit for the Algebra I, U.S. History, and Living Environment Regents as well. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, we exceeded the city average in all areas of the Framework for Great Schools. Effective School leadership (4.82/5.0) and Rigorous Instruction (4.49/5.0) we rated amongst the highest. In an effort to continue to provide students with rigorous instruction, we will provide students with the opportunity to sit for three Regents exams this year. We will be administering the U.S. History, Living Environment, and Algebra I Regents to our 8th grade students who express interest in taking the exam after fulfilling the coursework. We are also focused on providing parents with a supportive school environment. We want parents to be aware of our "open door" policy as it relates to instruction as increase the number of attempts to request families to volunteer and support the school. We will continue to reach out to the community and work collaboratively to make decisions that are best for our students. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 18K763 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 257 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 15 15 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 8 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 63.4% % Reduced Lunch 3.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.4% 3.9% 1.6% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.25 8% 42% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 45.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 5 5 94.6% 14.0% 17.1% 93.0% 0.4% 1.2% 0 50% 2.8 24.5% 45% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. We have created two STEAM themed interdisciplinary units to engage students in rigorous and relevant tasks that involve critical thinking during the 2017-2018 school year. Our approach to curriculum development and instruction has resulted in a 33.3% increase in ELA proficiency since 2015 and a 14.1% increase in mathematics proficiency on the same assessment. BSEA administered two regents exams in the spring of 2018. The Living Environment Regents was administered to 27 students. 23 out of the 27 students passed (85% passing rate). 28 students sat for the Algebra I Regents. 23 out of 28 passed (82% passing rate). 2. For the 2018-19 school year we need to provide students with opportunities to apply math content through STEAM based activities and units. STEAM allows students to be engaged in relevant and complex problems using the math skills needed to be acquired in middle school. Our second priority is for us to provide students with an additional Regents opportunity. We plan to offer US History to our grade 8 students in the spring of 2019. Our third priority is to provide our students with a Multi-Tier System of Support (MTSS) for our students focused on the skills and standards of the Common Core ELA standards. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 3  By June 2019, we will have developed an RtI Leadership Team and team of RtI practitioners who will assess the decoding and comprehension skills of our 7th grade students, provide tier 2 and tier 3 supports and monitor progress. This work will result in a 5% decrease in the number of students requiring tier 1 and tier 2 interventions. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Teachers use two periods of their professional time to meet as Professional Learning Communities (PLCs): Teachers turn-key from Professional Development, curricula, and content-specific meetings. We will also address our key instructional needs as well as provide school-wide strategies for meeting our goals, including but not limited to differentiated instruction, how to analyze state assessment data using Aimesweb and DRP, discussion and assessment strategies. We have a specific PLC that focuses on the progress of our SwD and ENL students. ● Data Inquiry Teams: Reflect on current and previous instructional data, assess student work, analyze and create new goals based on feedback from lessons/units and student progress. Teachers incorporate accommodations for students with disabilities, ENL students, and multiple modalities. Vertical planning teams will meet quarterly in order to evaluate the curriculum. Teachers Sept. 2018-June, 2019 Administration,Content Ambassadors, Model Teachers,Peer Collaborative Teacher, and RtI Coordinator AIS Services AIS Services Teachers Sept. 2018-June, 2019 District 18 support, RtI Leadership Team, RtI providers ● We will provide before and after school Academic Intervention Services (AIS). Teachers will work with students who are scoring below the standards in ELA and Math as identified by the 2018 NYS exams. Students will work in small groups during the school day . We are in year 2 of our work with the NYS RtI TAC program. The RtI team will focus on tracking and improving comprehension and oral reading fluency. Aimesweb & DRP 5   Data collected will guide teachers in their data inquiry, professional learning communities, and curriculum planning meetings. ● The itemized skill breakdown is used by teachers to modify instruction during their PLCs. Google Drive Teachers Sept. 2018-June, 2019 Administration and Content Ambassadors ● Disseminate information on progress of curriculum writing and turnkey information in Professional Learning Communities, Common Planning, and Curriculum planning session via Google Drive. ASD Nest Teachers / Assistant Principal/Speech Teacher Skedula/PupilPath Sept. 2018-June, 2019 Administration and Teacher Leaders Parents Sept. 2018-June, 2019 PTA Executive Board and SLT • Online grade book and parent communication portal. Families and students can better track student academic and behavioral progress. The web tool allows for teachers and families to communicate on the students development, concerns, and general feedback. Monthly Newsletter ● Monthly Newsletter is for our parents and is written by students who outline their monthly educational progress. Parent Forums & School Leadership Team (SLT) Parent forums are based on the information parents received in PupilPath and Monthly Newsletter. Here, parents and teachers are able to discuss and collaborate on curriculum planning and projects. Parents and teachers would be able to use the current curriculum and student data (e.g. portfolios, i-Ready, etc.) to drive the conversation. These discussions are also held in our SLT meetings where our parent members are given an opportunity to voice their concerns, feedback, and suggestions. Parents are welcome to come into the school at any time and are able to schedule meetings with teachers from 2:45pm-3:55pm on Tuesday afternoons. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will provide families with workshops related to strategies that can be implemented at home to support student growth. Our Parent Coordinator will organize these workshops from September 2018 through June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 6  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Peer Collaborative Teacher, Sadie Goldman is our RtI Coordinator who oversees the diagnostic assessments and progress monitoring. ● Professional development time scheduled during the extended day. This is led by our model teachers. Model Teachers - 2 ● Use of teacher teams, content ambassadors and administration for demonstration of specific instructional strategies, development of norms and common language among teachers and students in the implementation of curriculum, development of assessments, and analysis of data for the subject/grade. ● Engaging in intra/inter-visitations, out of school PD, teacher team meetings, and at least two periods of common prep time to allow for common planning, professional development, department meetings and other structures to foster teacher collaboration ● Use of the NYCDOE resources such as the Common Core Library, Department of English Language Learners and Student Support instructional resources recommended by the DOE Handbook for Professional Learning, and professional texts, OTPS for student consumables and workshop materials ● DataCation’s Skedula/PupilPath: ● Summer Professional Development ● Before and After-school skill building: (SONYC Grant) Parent Workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019 we will have our diagnostic assessment and benchmark assessment completed. Students will be engaged in tier 2 and tier 3 interventions. There will 2-3 students who will move closer to tier 1 intervention. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Aimesweb, student portfolios, and iReady diagnostic. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1.According to the 2018 NYC School Survey Report, BSEA leads the district by 8% and the city by 13% in addressing the social-emotional needs of our students. We outpaced the district by 10% and the City average by 6% in providing students with providing personal attention and support to students. As a staff, during summer professional learning sessions, the staff outlined BSEA’s key core values to encourage professionalism and behaviors of a scholar. This resulted in BSEA’s “PREP” values where students are expected to be Prepared, Respectful, Engaged, and Persistent in all areas. BSEA had 29 occurrences in classrooms as identified by 2016-2017 OORS data and 21 occurrences according to the same data set for the 2017-2018 school year. Increasing the reinforcement of "BSEA Bucks'" distribution electronically will allow students to better track their own progress toward achieving our values and decreasing occurrences. 2. Middle School students must be prepared for college and career. In order to prepare them, there must be a clear set of structures and expectations that students are aware of that will allow them to be successful in the middle school setting and beyond. In the 2017-2018 school year we provided Restorative Circles to all of our students for 10 minutes per day and need to provide a longer time frame for the circles to be valuable. Based on the 2017-2018 OORS data, 44 out of 51 incidences were within the levels 1-3. 3. We are providing students with a student created anti-bullying campaign known as “No Place for Hate.” Students meet weekly with the guidance counselor and dean to discuss proper ways to communicate and how to be an advocate for positive relationships. We are providing our students with College Access for All. Students get to visit college campuses and hear from various students and departments within St. John’s college to learn about the steps they can take to be college and career ready. We have provided circles training to 60% of our students. Students received circles daily for 10 minutes per day. Part 2 – Annual Goal 9  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a a 3% decrease in the number of Level 4 and 5 incidences as indicated by OORS report data. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). BSEA (Brooklyn Science and Engineering Academy) Bucks ● We use “BSEA bucks” (Brooklyn Science and Engineering Academy money) as the PBIS (Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports) system throughout each zone of the school. ● All members of the school community including, SSA, cafeteria, classroom teachers, and support staff will have BSEA bucks to support positive behaviors. ● These bucks can be redeemed at the school store as well as in participation of school events such as Movie Madness and Crazy Hat Day. PBIS Handbook ● PBIS handbook outlining PREP (Preparedness, Respectful, Engagement, and Persistence) expectations and distribution of BSEA bucks throughout all areas of the school environment. ● An analysis of IEP goals took place in order to align the effective aspects of bucks to all stakeholders. Parent engagement to take place via: ● PTA meeting (monthly)  Workshops ● SLT meeting (monthly) Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students September 2018-June 2019 All Staff All Students September 2018-June 2019 Administration, teachers, SSA, Cafeteria staff, School Aide, School Secretary, SGO, Guidance Counselor, Custodial Staff All Students and families September 2018-June 2019 PTA, Administration, Teachers, SLT ● Monthly newsletters and Family/Parent workshops Via the PBIS handbook, expectations for BSEA bucks are clearly outlined and made fair for all students. • The system rewards and encourages positive behaviors. All Students September 2018-June 2019 Guidance Counselor, All staff, Student Government Organization • The Student Government is tasked with creating a public rubric for the distribution of BSEA bucks. 1 • The SGO will also operate the BSEA store and are responsible for tracking BSEA bucks in school store. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Parent Coordinator will host family events based on parent interest identified through survey data to invite families into the school and further develop a partnership with families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. High-interest items for school store, printing resources for BSEA bucks, information sessions for stakeholders, school website (OTPS). 2. Parent Coordinator and Guidance department will invite families in individually to complete high school applications. 3. Parent coordinator and teachers will conduct workshops that are of interest to families. 4. We program our students to have a "crew" class. This class is based on student and teacher preference. Students develop relationships with their peers and an adult in the building for two periods per week. 5. We programmed students to have "circles" class. In this class, a trained adult works with students on the principles of restorative justice. 6. We provide academic and sports clubs before and after school using per session funds. Both administrators are directly involved with all school programs and oversee the morning and afternoon programs as well. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1 st, there will be a 2% decrease in the rate of level 4 and 5 incidences as indicated by the OORS data reporting system. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2  OORS report data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Using the Advance MOTP Dashboard, we have analyzed the data from both informal and formal observations and identified that 57% of our teachers were rated Effective overall according to the MOTP based on the Danielson Framework during the 2017-2018 school year. According to the same data set, 38% of teachers were rated Highly Effective using the same measures. 2. The focus will be on providing professional learning options to staff based on their beginning of year goals and targeting observation data to ensure that teachers are making strides in the areas identified related to Domain 3. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all (100%) teachers will be provided with ongoing professional learning focused on delivering Engaging Instruction, accountable talk and discussion, and ongoing assessment of student learning measured by a 5% increase in the number of teachers rated Effective or Highly Effective in Domain 3 based on the Danielson Framework as indicated on the MOTP rating within the Advance system. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Administration and Content Ambassadors will support teacher growth that shifts teacher practices through a minimum of three informal observations followed by specific, actionable, and timely feedback. Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration, Content Ambassadors, Model Teachers ● Content specific unit assessments will be developed, administered and analyzed in our PLC's to target specific skills and students who require additional support with specific standards. ● All teachers will participate in professional development that will better inform their practice in all Danielson components to improve pedagogical delivery with special emphasis on Danielson’s components 3b, 3c, and 3d. Teachers Sept. 2018-June, 2019 Content Ambassadors, TDC, and administration ● Development of a specific team to analyze the work of students with disabilities,ENLs, and other high-need student subgroups such as students in temporary housing. Teachers and Paraprofessionals Sept. 2018-June, 2019 Special Education Teachers, ENL teacher ● Teachers in all teams use protocols to analyze data and student work. ● Our school uses PupilPath as a parent outreach tool to ensure all families are up to date with students’ progress. Students, Parents Sept. 2018-June, 2019 Staff, Students, Parents ● We provide opportunities for parent meetings during our Tuesday parent-outreach time. ● We welcome parents to observe classes which occur regularly. ● We highlight student successes during our monthly PTA meetings by holding awards ceremonies based on academic and social-emotional growth observed in the school setting. ● The use of protocols allows for teachers to share and trust each other via common expectations and accountability. 5  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will share the work of our professional learning teams during our School Leadership Team meetings throughout the 2018-19 school year. The SLT Chairperson will share this data. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. • Teachers elected to make data inquiry as a part of their professional menu item along with running student interest clubs/crews • Math Ambassador to support data inquiry teams - Model Teachers - PTC - (1) • Outside professional learning opportunities which require substitute teachers • PupilPath - • Before and after school tutoring for students with title I status Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● By February 1st, 25% of teachers will have led professional learning sessions Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance 'HTML' MOTP reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. According to the 2018 School Environment Survey, 99% of the responses on the NYC School Survey related to Teacher Influence, 100% Program Coherence. 98% of the questions related to Inclusive Leadership and 99% Instructional Leadership were answered positively. According to the latest Quality Review report, "The principal and faculty systematically emphasize high expectations for professionalism and academic excellence to the entire community via ongoing communication and effective feedback and supports. Support provided through professional training and feedback to students and parents about progress toward expectations places students on a path to college and careers. The impact of these structures that support high expectations assure a culture of mutual accountability among faculty and students. As a result, a culture of unified expectations fosters student ownership over their educational experience and preparation for the next level." 2. In order to increase student achievement pedagogy must improve. As an effective administration, we must work with teachers to set professional goals that are monitored and supported throughout the year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will develop and focus on individual professional goals that will result in a 5% increase of student achievement as evidenced by the end of year (EOY) Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) assessment results. 7 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Principal,Assistant Principal, Teacher Development Coach, Teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Specific, actionable, timely feedback on classroom observations and inter-visitations. ● Aimesweb and DRP ● Individual teacher conferences ● Professional Learning sessions led by teachers and will focus on specific strategies to move pedagogical practices forward. ● Teacher developed goals.  Teacher Teams  Teacher led intervisitations ● Professional support and mentoring services led by our Assistant Principal and Data Specialist. Teachers ● Data-Inquiry Teams analyze student work to track trends. • Constant communication with parents through our PTA, SLT, website, and face to face meetings to communicate the goals and needs of the school, as well as our families Students, families Administration and Model Teachers All Staff September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 ● Celebrating student successes at monthly awards ceremonies, and teacher successes/accomplishments at regular intervals. Students, teachers, Families November 2018 – June 2019 Administration, Student Government, staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will share in much of the decision making through our Parent Teacher Association and School Leadership Team. Parents are invited into the school monthly by the Parent Coordinator, teachers, and administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Coverages/funds to provide professional learning activities ● Literacy Coach - Tax Levy ● Skedula/PupilPath - Title I SWP ● Common preparation periods ● Google Drive ● Supplies for awards - OTPS Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1st, 50% of teachers’ observations will be completed with specific and actionable feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MOTP Reports, Teacher Files on Google Drive, MOSL data, agendas, unit assessment data, and artifacts from PLC meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The latest Quality Review report indicated, "The principal and faculty systematically emphasize high expectations for professionalism and academic excellence to the entire community via ongoing communication and effective feedback and supports. Support provided through professional training and feedback to students and parents about progress toward expectations places students on a path to college and careers." According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, the preliminary results indicated that BSEA outpaced the district and city by 4% with regard to Parent Outreach. 96% of the responses were answered positively. According to the same measure, 88% of the questions related to Parent Involvement in the School were answered positively. BSEA outpaced the District by 2% and the city by 3%. 2. We are entering our fifth year of operation and want to continue to establish strong ties to our community. We have 88% Parent Involvement in school according to the 2017-2018 School Environment Survey. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 65% of parents will attend or volunteer at a school function as evidenced by attendance at PTA meetings, Parent-Teacher conferences, and Parent-child events. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? • Parent Workshops such as PupilPath, High School preparation, and assessment success; better help inform families about student progress in state assessments as well as in the classroom. Parents • Title I Meeting with parents All parents • Breakfast with ENL parents and increased use of translation services September 2018– June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers & Administration Administration and all staff • PupilPath online grading and communication system All Parents September 2018 – June 2019 Administration, Guidance Counselor, and all teachers • Website with e-mail functions • Parent notifications (e.g. newsletter, notices)  Use of Remind • Parents are invited to visit classrooms • PTA meeting provide a forum for staff and parent communication • Emphasis on parent correspondence for positive behaviors and academic growth, welcoming main office 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students, Families September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, PTA Executive Board, and all staff If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Brienza's Educare College Access for All 1  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PupilPath - Title I SWP Community partners - Brienza's Educare Light refreshments for parent events - Tax Levy Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1st, 5 newsletters will have been distributed to 100% of families both digitally and hard copy. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Family event sign-in sheets, Student-Led Conference sign-in sheets, and PupilPath registration. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Aimesweb, DRP and benchmark assessments. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Blended Learning models. Small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) School day and after school We have created an intervention handbook of the RtIstrategies that we use in small groups. Content area teachers are trained on those strategies by the RtIspecialist. Before reading: Preview the text Students preview the whole passage before reading its sections. Previewing the text activates prior knowledge, stimulates students’ interest about the topic, and facilitates making predictions. During this step, students look at headings, key words, pictures, and charts in a short period of time. The teacher asks students some questions to 3  engage them in a classroom discussion about what they learned from the previews. Also, the teacher encourages students to predict what they think they will learn from reading. During reading: Click and clunk (I get it - I do not get it) Students monitor their understanding and decide if they really understand what they read or not during reading. When students read a passage with understanding, they proceed smoothly through the text. When students find a word, concept, or idea hard to understand, it is a clunk. Clunks break down reading comprehension and make it hard to understand the whole text. In this case, students need to identify the clunks then figure them out using fix- up strategies, written on clunk cards, to understand the text. Fix-up strategies may include but are not limited to:  Vocabulary fix-up skills: The student rereads the sentence and 4  looks for clues to understand the meaning of the unknown vocabulary word in the sentence. Also, breaking up the word into its syllables or prefix and suffix to look for smaller words.  Read-Pause-Reflect:To help students monitor their understanding during reading, allow them to decide to pause at any point to recall the main ideas for each part. If a student does not understand the topic, he/she rereads the section.  Partner Retell: Students work in pairs in this activity. One student assigned the role of “re-teller” and the other assigned the role of “listener”. The reteller talks about the 5  main idea(s), concepts, and points of the reading while the other student listens, comments, and ask questions. Then, the teacher randomly calls one of the listeners to share information told by the reteller. Get the gist Students learn to identify the most important idea(s) in the text during reading. This strategy teaches students to use their own words to explain the main ideas of every paragraph or two using a few words to check for understanding. After reading: Wrapping up After reading, students identify the most important ideas from the entire section they have read. They generate questions and answers about the information in the text. Encourage students to create high order thinking questions and write 6  Mathematics ireadydiagnostic and benchmark assessments. Science Aimesweband Social Studies Teacher, parent, or student request At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher, staff, family referral based on Pre-Referral Intervention Manual (Hawthorne) down the most important information in the text. Ready Review of math vocabulary Focus on computational skills Homework help/tutoring, (example: guided reading with English Language Arts teachers) Homework help/tutoring, (example: guided reading with English Language Arts teachers) Counseling by Guidance Counselor Small group School day and after school Small group School day and after school Small group School day and after school Small group or 1-to-1 School day 7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 4 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will provide our STH population with school uniform shirts, classroom supplies, at-risk counseling, and advisory. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 8  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. • Strategies we use to recruit Highly Qualified Teachers include using Open Hire, consultation with our District and Borough Field Support Director, close supervision and analysis of our per diem staff members and attending recruitment fairs.  We have secured three model teachers to support new staff. • Careful attention is given to matching teacher qualifications with the needs of the school. • Teachers who do not have permanent certification are offered the opportunity to be reimbursed for course work that would lead to permanent certification in the area in which they are teaching. • We retain Highly Qualified Teachers by providing instructional support through various sources including mentoring, peer coaching, and Professional Learning Communities. • Human resources committee is used for hiring decisions • A rubric is used to identify the candidates abilities as they are aligned to the 2013 Danielson Framework • Offer the candidates the opportunity to do a demonstration lesson • Teacher suggestions of learning opportunity topics 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). • Content level “Ambassadors” that attend and turnkey information learned at outsides professional learning sessions • Teacher Development Coach who visits and provides professional learning sessions to staff 0  • Inter-visitations within our building as well as in other high performing middle schools • Teachers are surveyed and afforded opportunities for attendance at a variety of professional development workshops conducted by the DOE, District, UFTTC and school based specialists which will hone their skills. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A team of teachers representing each department and grade level will meet to assess and select the Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) for the school. The team analyzes school-wide data and isolates foci for the school year as well as common assessments to track progress and identify challenge areas. teachers are selected to act as ambassadors for their content area. These ambassadors attended professional learning 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 1  plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A: Parts 3 and 4 Section 5B:Parts 3 and 4 Section 5C: Parts 3 and 4 Section 5D: Parts 3 and 4 Section 5E: Parts 3 and 4 Section 5A: Parts 3 and 4 Section 5C: Parts 3 and 4 Section 5D: Parts 3 and 4 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal 149,493 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,203,004 X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Brooklyn Science and Engineering Academy (BSEA), in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Brooklyn Science and Engineering Academy (BSEA), will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 4  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 5  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Brooklyn Science and Engineering Academy (BSEA), in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of 6  student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 7  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 8  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 9  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 18 School Name Brooklyn Science and Engineering Academy Borough Brooklyn School Number 763 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Angela DeFilippis Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sadie Goldman Teacher/Subject Area Tiffane Barrow/Math Teacher/Subject Area Lauren Marfo/ELA Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal N/A Coach type herN/Ae School Counselor Diana Oliveri-Pilzer Parent Salma Gandor Parent Coordinator Yahya Seifullah Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 225 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 5 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.22% 1  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 1. We use the iReady diagnostic and assessment program. We are able to identify a students’ phonological awareness, phonemic awareness, understanding of high frequency words, understanding of on-level vocabulary based on prefixes, suffixes and base words, comprehension of literature, comprehension of informational text, and Lexile performance measure. The information is used to modify unit plans and guides the scaffolds used in lesson planning. The initial testing is used to establish instructional foci. The teacher created assessments and interim assessments administered allow us to track the efficacy of the instructional strategies being implemented. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We allocate funding for the assessment resource, we have an RtI coordinator, and offer professional learning opportunities for teachers to address these pedagogical strategies. 2  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We administer New York City Performance Tasks and school based unit assessments. All classroom and periodic assessments are analyzed weekly. There is continuous conversation between administration, content and ELL teachers about our student’s performance. We will continue to analyze student data. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We meet bi-weekly in common planning meetings and provide time for students to receive RtI groups. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We review the NYSESLAT data and identify areas of growth and those in need of reinforcement. We administer school based unit assessments (pre/post) and analyze student performance related to each school within the unit. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have bi-weekly common planning meetings and utilize Google Docs to share assessment data, lesson plans, and meeting minutes. When analyzing unit assessment data, we identify students requiring additional support and make RtI referrals for further targeted instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students receive services based on CR Part 154.2. We currently provide integrated and standalone ENL services. Students travel together as a group but have an individualized program based on the number of minutes required for standalone services based on CR Part 154.2. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We plan to follow the model delineated in charts 5.1 and 5.2 to instruct on ENL instructional time as well the utilization of stand- alone and integrated ENL. We develop programs prior to the school year that address the number of minutes needed based on each students' level. 3  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In all content areas instruction, the content is delivered via auditory, visual, and written means. The student is asked to speak and listen in English in pair, small group, and whole group discussions. The student also reads and chunks grade level texts. The student is required to provide written responses (e.g. opening activity questions, embedded and culminating performance tasks, and exit tickets). Supports like front loaded vocabulary and transitional words/phrases are provided to the student to help build comfort with the language and overall language acquisition. Sentence stems and frames are provided to the student as a beginning support. Eventually, the student must use all supports in embedded and culminating tasks. The teachers will use the data from these assessments to tracks student progress. Teachers co-teach and co-plan in preparation for their classes in order to ensure that all students' needs are met. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students will use books in their native language, be grouped with students who speak the same language and use native language glossaries. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Students are receiving small group instruction during their foundations period, CMP3 curriculum in math along with supports from CCLS bundles. To increase Academic Rigor for ELL students, teachers used prescriptive and diagnostic writing sample tests for each individual student to differentiate instruction. Teachers incorporated specific writing strategies into their lessons with these students, as evidenced in their lesson plans and based on students’ interim assessments. Students received targeted instruction, based on the results of the interim assessments in reading writing, listening and speaking, as evidenced in the teachers’ plans. Flexible cooperative learning groups, and modeled learning activities which continue to be utilized to deliver and enhance instruction. To develop content area instruction, teachers continue to focus on building background knowledge through vocabulary instruction. During lessons, teachers provided students with descriptions, explanations or examples of new terms as they are introduced. Students will participate in activities that later restate the new terms in their own words and using a non-linguistic representation of the term. Students also completed activities to increase vocabulary skills through accountable talk and active discussion with peers. Highly contextualized student tasks continue to be developed in these venues that encourage students’ thinking, speaking, reading and writing in English. Language concept glossaries are available to students in each content area, as well as progressive middle school dual language dictionaries for their daily use and for intensive work with projects and reports. SIFE students are identified and given an interview. SIFE students will receive at risk intervention services during the day. Students who receive services 4 to 6 years are offered AIS. Long term ELLs will receive AIS with SETTS teachers. In addition, these students are strongly encouraged to attend all after school programs 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We use the iReady diagnostic and instructional program which provides students will a unique username and password that allows them to log in to i-Ready. Students take i-Ready Diagnostic at the beginning of the year to establish a baseline for instructional decisions. School administrators and teachers also use monthly Progress Monitoring Assessments to monitor progress throughout the year. These mini assessments will provide a quick “temperature check” to see if students are on track or need further intervention. Students will take a follow-up Diagnostic at the end of the school year to measure growth over 4  the year. If we had students who were ELL-SWD we would implement P r e d i c t a b l e r o u t i n e s C l e a r g o a l s a n d l e a r n i n g o b j e c t i v e s - - b o t h c o n t e n t a n d English language objectives B u i l d s a n d / o r a c t i v a t e s p r i o r k n o w l e d g e E x p l i c i t t e a c h i n g o f w o r d s f r o m t e x t , w i t h v i s u a l representation of concepts D i r e c t s t r u c t u r e d t e a c h i n g w i t h e n g a g e m e n t a n d participation strategies G u i d e d a n d i n d e p e n d e n t p r a c t i c e w i t h c o r r e c t i v e feedback F r e q u e n t p r o g r e s s m o n i t o r i n g a n d r e - t e a c h i n g T e a c h e r a d j u s t s p a c e a n d c o m p l e x i t y o f v e r b a l instruction 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We do not currently have any ELL-SWD students but we have a foundations class that students are flexibly grouped into to address math and ELA skills throughout the year. All curricular units include scaffolds for all learners, multiple forms of assessment, as well as focus on vocabulary acquistion. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All intervention services are offered in English, with the help of bilingual dictionaries, bilingual glossaries, and the buddy system. There is a homework/academic help program that all ELLs are invited to. There, they are provided with academic interventions based on the need of the individual student. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our SONYC after-school program. We will be offering academic, enrichment and physical activities for 3 hours every day after school. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We offer free-standing ENL services. None will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL's are offered homework help, video game design, stock market club, soccer, basketball, football, and academic academy after school. There are no exclusions at all. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our students use the iReady diagnostic and instructional program for both math and ELA, they use text and trade books, laptops for research and word processing, and handouts for reinforcement and enrichment as needed. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 5  Native language is supported by using bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, and the buddy system. The same materials are used in the content areas. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students are provided with books and materials that are grade appropriate in all subject areas. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our students use the iReady diagnostic and instructional program for both math and ELA, they use text and trade books, laptops for research and word processing, and handouts for reinforcement and enrichment as needed. We have a shared library that we use to expose students of multi-level texts. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs will have an orientation and tour upon entering into our school completed by Sadie Goldman our ENL teacher. We will implement the buddy system for newly arrived ELLs in order for them to become familiar with the school and its programs. New ELLs who enroll throughout the year are invited to participate in all activities during the school year, before, during and after the school day. These activities range from educationally based programs, to sports, and the arts. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? In the future, we will offer Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The goal of the professional development is to enhance teachers' ability to useinstructional strategies to support language acquisition and content area learning for ENLs. Activities will support pedagogic staff such as, administration, ENL Teachers, Content Area Teachers, Guidance, Special Education teachers, Paraprofessionals, psychologist, OT/PT, speech, serving ENLs. PD days will focus on training in assessment, in using data to inform instruction, in SIOP and other strategies and in specific programs for our tutorials. Our ENL teacher is provided with all professional development opportunities provided by OELL. Topics will include: • Identification and placement of ENLs in compliance with Part 154 Regulations • Eligibility of ENLs to take mandated tests • Using ENL strategies in all content areas • Scaffolding strategies in the content area • Modifying our standards-based curriculum • Literacy development for ENLs using a scaffolding model 6  • Differentiation of instruction for ENLs All staff is supported by leadership and guidance. Leadership provides opportunities for professional learning and guidance provides intervention and mentoring based on the needs of the students. All professional learning is satisfied through in-house professional learning opportunities, network support, and through our literacy coach. Topics will include: • Identification and placement of ENLs in compliance with Part 154 Regulations • Eligibility of ENLs to take mandated tests • Using ENL strategies in all content areas • Scaffolding strategies in the content area • Modifying our standards-based curriculum • Literacy development for ENLs using a scaffolding model • Differentiation of instruction for ENLs All staff is supported by leadership and guidance. Leadership provides opportunities for professional learning and guidance provides intervention and mentoring based on the needs of the students. All professional learning is satisfied through in-house professional learning opportunities, network support, and through our literacy coach. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We provide all staff data on who our ENLs and Former ENLs are, and how they have achieved on past assessments. In addition, during our PD and collaborative data inquiry time, teachers meet to discuss the strengths and challenges of our Ell students. In the 2014-2015 year, our ENL teacher examined the work of our ELL and two former Ells and shared findings with her team. As a team, they came up with scaffolds and strategies to help them achieve throughout the content areas. These strategies were turn keyed to the entire pedagogical staff. In addition, our ENL teacher and the Special Education and ELA teachers received training on a collaborative reading strategy specifically geared toward supporting Ells literacy throughout the content areas. We will be informing our pedagogical staff of the changes in the professional development requirements as per CR part 154.2. In addition, staff will be encouraged to participate in Professional Developments regarding the needs of Ells. Furthermore, we will hold Professional Development during our own PD Mondays on strategies specifically geared toward helping Ells. Our teachers regularly submit agendas of their PD's to our Pupil Secretary and she keeps them in the teacher's file. We also keep a record of our teacher's PD attendance including the subject. Our ENL teacher will attend trainings provided by our Field Support Center as well as Central to meet the 50% requirement. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In September, parents of ELLs are invited to a meeting along with the Principal, and ESL Coordinator. At this meeting, parents are being informed about the instructional and supplemental programs for ELLs at BSEA. In December we will offer a second meeting to ELL parents where they can communicate students’ progress with the ESL teacher, Principal and content area teachers. We survey parents multiple times per year to identify what they believe the needs of their children may be as well as their own needs. In order to make sure communication is clear, we have documents translated as well as have a translator available for families. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 7 We will be offering family sports and movie nights, resume writing, interview skills workshops, and financial planning. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, ANGELA DEFILIPPIS, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Angela DeFilippis Title Principal Assistant Principal Yahya Seifullah Parent Coordinator Sadie Goldman ENL/Bilingual Teacher Salma Gandor Parent Tiffane Barrow Teacher/Subject Area Lauren Marfo Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 5/26/2017 1/1/01 5/26/2017 5/26/2017 5/26/2017 5/26/2017 5/26/2017 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 0  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 18K763 School Name: Brooklyn Science & Engineering Acad Superintendent: Beverly Wilkins The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Sadie Goldman ENL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To assess language preference of the parent community, we utilize Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), the RAPL report in ATS, and the information in Student Emergency Contact cards (Blue Cards). 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic 1 0.32 1 0.32 1  EWE French Haitian Creole English Spanish 1 0 11 287 10 0.32 0 3.55 92.58 3.23 1 2 10 286 10 0.32 0.65 3.23 92.26 3.23 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you Family handbook September 15, 2017 New York State testing, Parent conferences,, letters from school leadership, and workshops dates October 1, 2017 plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The DOE Translation Department Staff who speak the preferred language of our families. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings September, November, March & May June 1, 2018 We have three parent teacher conferences and one curriculum night throughout the year. We also have at least one open house or family activity night. In attendance, we have at least one bilingual, Haitian-Creole/English, staff member. Out reach for these events is also made by a bilingual staff member and is coordinated by the school's LAC. How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Bilingual Staff Bilingual staff 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. PupilPath, phone calls, and letters Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We will provide staff with professional learning opportunities around Chancellor's Regulation A-663 Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school has required notification signs at our entrance and main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will gather feedback about the availability of service through parent surveys. This will be done in coordination with our PTA and SLT. 3  4 
