 19K764 School Name: THE URBAN ASSEMBLY SCHOOL FOR COLLABORATIVE HEALTHCARE Principal: CANDACE HUGEE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Urban Assembly School for Collaborative Healthcare 3432343 9, 10, 11, 12 School Number (DBN): 19K764 999 Jamaica Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11208 718-277-1572 Phone Number: 718-277-6106 Fax: Candace Hugee chugee@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Candace Hugee John Ciano KarenHerrera Hope Thompson Karen Herrera Kayla Childers Lisa Lofaso District Information Fred Walsh Affinity Schools CUNY/UA Geographical District: Superintendent: 333 7th Avenue, Room 709B/715, Manhattan, NY 10001 Superintendent’s Office Address: FWalsh@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3754 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Affinity Group Field Support Office FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: Alexandra Anormaliza 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, 11201 AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Candace Hugee John Ciano Karen Herrera Luisa Cedeno Bianca Odia Ellen Gonzalez Lisa LoFaso Cathy Jackson Patrice Reid Shirin Ahmed *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent   DiannanMithu Grace Starr Fredrick Black Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/UASCHStaff Member/UASCHStaff Member/UASCH Staff Member/ Student Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of the Urban Assembly School for Collaborative Healthcare (UASCH) is to develop the academic, professional, and life skills our graduates need to succeed in any college and career path they choose, and to empower students to create healthier communities wherever they go.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Urban Assembly School for Collaborative Healthcare (UASCH) opened in September 2014 as the fifth school located at the Franklin K. Lane campus with its first cohort of 9th grade students. UASCH graduated its first cohort in June 2018 with an 82% graduation rate. As we continue to seek program approval through NYSED to become an official Career and Technical Education (CTE) school, we continue to be deeply focused on college and career readiness with rich healthcare exposure for all of our students. UASCH will initially offer a Clinical Healthcare CTE pathway with end-of-course licensing opportunities in Medical Assistant and Emergency Medical Technician. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. As we approach our fifth year of growth, we can see our student population more clearly now than ever before, and recognize where we have some special populations of students who need targeted support. As a school focused on healthcare, we have attracted a higher percentage of female students (between 68-70% female with 31-33% male). Having an imbalance in gender is sometimes a catalyst for additional stressors, as our young men and women develop their social and emotional skills. Knowing that our population tips towards girls, we are mindful as a community about the importance of a school wide Advisory program where students work in small groups on focused activities that support their personal and academic growth. Additionally, we acknowledge that our Students with Disabilities (SwDs) and our English as a New Language students (ENLs) have historically struggled to maintain grade level literacy and numeracy skills. Currently, 14% of our students have IEPs, and 26% receive ENL services. Our ENL population has drastically grown from 5% two years ago. As a result, even as we meet our students for the first time in 9th grade and as newcomers, we recognize the deep need for closely monitoring their strengths and struggles, and the importance of using data to inform our instruction, targeted to their individual needs. As a school community we have identified our special populations as our English as populations of need. We will increase their credit accumulation, Regents pass rates, and literacy skills. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Areas of Progress: Building on our goals from last year, in 2018-19 we continued the development of a positive campus culture, the development and refinement of systems and structures to analyze student data to inform their academic and social-emotional needs, and development of teachers’ professional practices. In addition to these core academic goals, we continued to strengthen our healthcare partnerships and our relationships with parents. We have made significant strides in Cultivating a Supportive Environment for teachers and students. The continuation of our Advisory program, which is based on the belief that our students need Social Emotional learning support in order to be successful, and helped us keep students open to learning opportunities within the classroom and beyond the school into the healthcare workplace. We attribute a 47% decline in incidents reported in citywide tracking system OORS, to our school wide focus on this goal. During the our latest Quality Review cited School Culture as an Area of Celebration, stating that we “maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults.” These experiences make it easier for us to cultivate Strong Family-Communities Ties. Through our extensive programs and internships to promote the healthcare field and make connections between students, families, and potential career opportunities, we are able to leverage our relationships with parents to have increased communication and commitment from parents than one would otherwise expect. Another area of strength in our school have been the development of our Collaborative Teachers. Through department and grade level teams, our teachers have designed curriculum, collaboratively assessed student work samples, analyzed data to inform student support plans, and participated in inquiry based projects.Using an internal tracking system, public to our school community in Google Drive, ee have tripled the number of classroom intervisistations conducted from the 2016-2017 school year to 2017-2018, in support of streamlining our teacher 0  expectations around Danielson component 3b and 3c. For the 2018-2019 school year, we will support teaming opportunities through our four model teacher positions and one peer collaborative teacher role. Many of these areas of progress can be attributed to the leadership of our principal, Candace Hugee, who has made it her personal mission to nurture positive and proactive relationships with students and teachers. Through her leadership and example, teachers and students have a clear understanding of the expectations and have built a strong degree of Trust across stakeholders and building community ties. When asked in the 2017-2018 NYC Learning Environment Survey, 100% of teachers indicated that the principal clearly communicates a strong vision for the school. The key areas of focus for UASCH during the 2018-2019 school year include the continued development of a positive school and campus culture, the development and refinement of systems and structures to analyze student data to address the academic and social-emotional needs of students, supporting teachers and staff in the development of their professional practice and developing and strengthening relationships with families and healthcare partners. Areas of Focus: Since we have a strong sense of school community and a supportive learning environment, with interested and engaged parents, we can leverage these areas to increase student achievement and bolster teacher practice. According to our Quality Review and 2 Principal Performance Reviews, Rigorous Instruction is an area for focus. During the 2017-208 school, In particular, we see teachers’ strategic, instructional strategies to meet students’ needs as a high priority. Additionally, our lowest rated Danielson components are 1e:Designing Coherent Instruction and 3c: Engaging Students in learning (data trend-average of 2.3 respectively). We know that we have laid a strong foundation from which to target this area of focus. With effective teacher teams, instructional partnerships with Teacher's College and a culture of using data to inform social-emotional supports and academic goals, we will focus on bringing the ideas and theories to life in the classroom environment. Based on the Learning Environment Survey and our Quality Review, we acknowledge that our teachers need to make progress in facilitating meaningful student to student discussions, and design activities that are engaging for all students. By leveraging the Danielson Framework, frequent classroom observations and professional development, we will be able to identify why the Common Core Aligned curriculum isn’t being implemented highly engaging instructional strategies. Along these lines, we are looking forward on focusing increased efforts for our Collaborative Team Teachers, who need support and collaboration to provide meaningful and targeted instructional goals for students. We believe that when our instructional practices are more aligned with student needs, we will see a direct increase in student performance. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 19K764 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 313 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 76.4% % Reduced Lunch 18.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.2% 39.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.25 22% 67% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 24 25 2 4 85.3% 3.5% 14.1% 38.3% 13.4% 6.1% 0 56% 3.8 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: As cited in our latest Quality Review, our school earned a Proficient rating in Indicator 2.2: Assessment. The reviewer noted that “teachers use a schoolwide grading policy, aligned to curricula,” and that “actionable feedback that serves as an indicator of student mastery of the targeted skills is consistently evident across classrooms.” Our use of assessments and the subsequent data generated is a key feature of our progress monitoring. Additionally, the 2017-18 School Survey confirmed that most teachers and students believe that the school provides a rigorous and coherent curriculum, incorporating Common Core Shifts in Literacy and Math. Some significant data trends that have informed our decision making have been: internal school gradebooks and credit accumulation. Based on the 2017-2018 scholarship reports, our average course pass rate was 71%. Needs: Our 2016-17 Quality Review and 2017-2018 PPO Reviews indicated that we are Developing in our practices around Indicators 1.1 – Ensuring an engaging, rigorous and coherent curricula, and 1.2 – Developing teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best. While many promising practices in curriculum and pedagogy were noted across the school community, these practices are not yet consistent in every classroom, which will have a significant impact on student achievement and our second upcoming graduation in 2018-19. In our fourth year as a school, we can already begin to see the impact of inconsistently rigorous instruction on our students’ performance on the Regents exams. Based on the 2016-17 School Quality guide , we see an average Regents score that is “below passing” with a 63.4% in Common Core Algebra, a 63.5% in Global History, and a 67.4% rate in Living Environment, with our special education and ELL students performing at least 10% below this benchmark. We know that our Regents scores are a demonstration of how students demonstrate their learning on-demand after a course, or series of courses. There is a direct link between student performance on the exam and their understanding of the curriculum. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 3  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will deepen rigor across classes, as evidenced by a 7% increase in students meeting college readiness benchmark in ELA from 64% to 71% and Math Regents from 48% to 55%. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Analyzing Assessments All Students September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, All Teachers, Model Teacher, Teacher's College Weekly professional development opportunities structure teachers’ analysis of the Regents exams in all subject areas, and provide a comprehensive analysis of students’ performance on Regents exams. Teachers need to have a have a deeper understanding of the expectations on the exam (content, skills, and test taking traits), as well as an opportunity to adapt curriculum and instructional strategies to align with values on the Regents Exams. This deepened knowledge will help teachers make strategic choices for SWDs and ENLs. Using the Dexpro tool and Item Data Analysis, teachers will identify the standards of weakness and created a targeted invention through lesson plans and assessments to address the deficiencies. Analyzing Student Work Teachers collaborate to focus on student work and proficiency on Regents level tasks through Mock Regents and/or MOSL assessments. Through grade level data meetings, content area and school-wide meetings, we will plan and assess student performance in order to identify their strengths and struggles, and make modification to curriculum and instruction to meet their needs. All Staff September 2018-June 2019 Principal, All Teachers Designing Inquiry Projects Teacher Teams September 2018-June 2019 Principal, All Teachers In grade level teams and co-teaching partnerships, teachers design a cycle of inquiry project based on students’ performance on a key skill found on all exams given on grade level. As whole school, we will work to create a repository of scaffold assignments, per grade, in ensure AP and College Readiness. Teachers develop key questions related to the challenges presented in the student work, and develop a plan of action to 5 support students’ growing fluency of the skill(s). Teacher teams will meet weekly during department meetings to implementation of UDL strategies, intervisitation cycles goals and benchmarks and plans to revise and adapt our action plan. Direct Support to Students All Students September 2018-June 2019 Principal, All Teachers, Instructional support for student progress such as conferencing, interventions, tutorial and Regents prep will provide students access to better understanding their performance and progress as well as develop fundamental concepts and knowledge required on the exam. Instructional teams will highlight and work on similar strategies for our ENL and Special Education. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Twice a month, during the contractual parent engagement time, UASCH will provide tutoring sessions for parents to help introduce the curriculum and support study skills at home. From 9th grade, families will actively engage weekly learning sessions taught by the content teachers during parent engagement time. Every week we will focus on a different subject area and present that month's unit to parents and work them through homework problems. The requirements to pass the Regents may be common place for school leaders, but are often mysterious to hardworking parents who don’t have time to research the requirements on their own. In 2018-19, we will make a commitment to create more dialogue and provide more information about the Regents exams, when they will be held, who is registered to take the exam, and what additional learning opportunities are available for the student. Parents need to be informed about important deadlines, requirements, and natural consequences for students who aren’t able to pass the exam. Increasing communication through regular phone calls, emails, letters sent home and special presentations during Parent Nights/PA should increase family awareness and support for these important exams. We will also use our parent text group on the Remind phone application and our online gradebook, Jupitergrades to engage families in ongoing reciprocal communication regarding their child's progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Through the a partnership with Teacher's College and regents prep programs, we will provide our students prep sessions and other instructional resources. In addition, our four Model Teachers and our Peer Collaborative Teacher will provide professional development to teaching staff on rigorous instruction. The budget allocations will be used to pay for instructional and CTE partnerships, per session for regents preparation and enrichment courses and curricular materials and support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X 6  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, we will effectively increase the level of rigor across classes, as evidenced by average score of the Regents exams by 5% across the following courses: Living Environment, Global History, Common Core Algebra I, Common Core Algebra II, Living Environment and Common Core English from an average pass rate of 53% to 61%. Assessment results will be analyzed by entire staff to inform instructional decisions as part of the Cycle of Continuous Improvement and to determine if students are on track to meet the school's 2019 target for each content area. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will use the average score of the January Regents as an instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We expect the January scores to increase by 2% as compared with the previous year, and an increase of 5% by the June exam. We will use Mock Regents as our constant progress monitoring tool. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The Advisory structure at UASCH is designed to ensure that each student has at least one adult among the staff members who serves as their point person within the school to support them emotionally and academically. The Advisor is acutely aware of their students’ (advisees’) academic progress, attendance trends and family dynamic. This knowledge serves to better connect the advisor and the family. Advisory meets three times a week to support the whole student by working to develop students’ social and emotional competencies through a Social Emotional based Curriculum, “School Connect”, build relationships between peers and staff and provide academic support. Data trends from the 2017-2018 school year indicate that the connection between the Advisor and the family has brought a healthy relationship between parents and the school as 93% of parents view their relationship with the school as a partnership and 90% of the families feel well-informed by the communication they receive from the school. Additionally, the safe and secure relationship that is formed between Advisor and Advisee allows for the Advisor to advocate for the student, as they know the student best and have their best interest in mind. Advocacy takes shape in reporting conflicts students have shared to the appropriate school personnel, serving as a student support in a mediation and communicating with teachers on the students’ behalf. While we saw an increase in suspensions during the 2017-2018 school year, we partly attribute that data to a closer relationship between students and their Advisors and an increase in student comfort level in reporting disciplinary infractions to their Advisor for support. As reported in the 2017-2018 School Satisfaction survey, 79% of the students report there is at least one teacher they trust. In the current school year we have added in a Peer Mediation program to address student and parent needs to feel safe and supported while in school and in an effort to address student conflicts before they become significant problems. We anticipate that by putting Peer Mediation program in place, we will help decrease the suspension rate as problems will be effectively resolved before they develop. Students, teachers and parents can all request a mediation through the Student Support Team- including the Administration, Deans, Social Worker and Guidance Counselor. Finally, given our chronic absenteeism data rate of 18.5% and percentage of students present 90% or more at 42.5%, students are monitored through the school Attendance team- including office staff, Parent Coordinator, Administration, Social Worker and Guidance Counselor. Students in the 80% attendance range (just below our school goal of 90%). The outreach around student attendance has increased a feeling of belonging, as students anticipate checking in with their attendance monitor and recognize that their presence (or lack thereof) goes 8  noticed on a daily basis. While our attendance rate for the 2017-2018 school year went down from the previous school year, our School Satisfaction survey indicates that 55% of students believe their teachers notice when they are in school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will develop and implement effective social/emotional and academic supports as evidenced by 10% increase in students with over 90% attendance from 55% to 65%. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The SEL team will meet weekly to review, revise, and plan the implementation of School Connect lessons in order to meet current student and school needs. We will conduct monthly professional learning opportunities in grade team meetings to discuss specific UDL strategies of engagement, representation and expression. The Attendance team will meet weekly to review attendance data, monitor trends and plan and implement incentives. The entire staff will meet monthly for Professional Development to review social emotional competencies, give and receive Advisory feedback and improve attendance monitoring (Dexpro). All Students, Advisors Student Peer mediators will meet monthly to review their cases, practice their conflict resolution skills and provide staff feedback on the current culture and climate of the school Peer Mediators Create goals together between Advisor, parents and students who are at-risk in the area of SWD, ELL or high absenteeism. At-risk students, Advisors, parents Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students, SEL Team Students below 90% attendance, Attendance team SEL Team Attendance Team, SEL Team, Attendance Team SEL team, Attendance team Advisors, parents, students Weekly SEL team meetings from 9/2018-6/2019 Weekly Attendance team meetings from 9/2018-6/2019 Monthly meetings from 9/2018-6/2019 Monthly meetings from 9/2018-6/2019 Monthly during parent outreach from 9/2018-6/2019 Grade Team Action Plans Targeted Advisory students September 2018-June 2019 Advisors Grade Level Teams will share On Track Action plans with student’s Advisors, who will who will increase individual support 0 to students with increased phone calls home, individual meetings with students, and incentives for meeting goals. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The SEL Team (Social Worker, Teacher lead) will present at PTA meetings on Social Emotional Learning and the School Connect Curriculum. Additionally, the Parent Coordinator will educate families on how to access their child's attendance data by presenting a Jupiter Ed tutorial in which parents will learn how to check for their child's attendance and send the teachers Jupiter messages which teachers and Advisors will be able to respond to. Jupiter Ed is the school's attendance and grading system by which teachers take daily attendance and update grades weekly. Parents can sign up to receive weekly or monthly notifications regarding their child's progress in addition to checking it daily to monitor student attendance. Parents can send the teacher Jupiter messages, which act like emails, whenever a question arises. Advisors will inform parents about important social emotional competencies being discussed during Parent Outreach. They will also encourage parents to download the Remind App in order to exchange information regularly and provide families with their Jupiter Ed log-in accounts so parents can monitor student attendance and grades. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Full staff trainings will allow for monthly professional development aimed at supporting Advisors. Advisory walk-throughs to monitor for trends and presented in full staff meetings to enhance Social Emotional Delivery. DESSA training to increase Advisors ability to look at students through the lens of Social Emotional competencies Attendance monitoring training via New Visions Data Portal to improve the way advisors and Attendance monitors track attendance trends Peer Mediation training with Operation Respect for students selected as school peer mediators with funding from Social Emotional Learning grant. Parent workshops with topics that include social emotional supports that are needed to improve the performance of students. Per session for teachers to complete home visits with chronic absenteeism. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 1  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 21 out of our 58 chronically absent students will show an increase in their attendance by 10%. Additionally, by mid-year our rate of students with 90% and above attendance will be 67%. This overall rate takes into account an anticipated decrease during the later months in the year as the year end goal of students with 90% and above attendance is 65%. Administration will monitor progress through reviewing marking-period pass rates which will help us to identify patterns and trends per course, with a formal inventory of Scholarship Reports at the Trimester. Grade Level Teams will monitor progress through mid-marking period progress reports and On Track Action Plans. At the end of the first semester the Student Support Team and the Attendance Team will review suspension rates, peer mediation frequencies and school wide attendance percentages via OORS, SOHO, ATS and our internal tracking system for mediations. The team will evaluate this data compared to the 2017-2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Pass rates on Scholarship Reports that will be used during content team meetings and administrative meetings to guide discussion and lesson plan formulation to support successful implementation of UDL strategies. We will use the DESSA, which is a two part screener and assessment to measure students’ strengths and weaknesses around Social Emotional Competencies. Advisors will share student results with teachers during grade team meetings so teachers can develop appropriate lessons, implement UDL strategies and develop goals for measuring student success. The SEL team will use the DESSA to evaluate students in November and again in May. We will also use OORS, SOHO, ATS and our internal tracking system. The OORS and SOHO data will be analyzed during SEL team and Advisory team meetings to guide lesson formulation and implementation of UDL strategies. The ATS data will be used during weekly attendance team meetings to design incentives and appropriate supports for students not meeting school wide goals. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Our school has structures for teachers to work collaboratively in department teams and grade level teams. Our 2016-17 Quality Review rated our teacher collaboration Proficient. Our weekly inquiry-based activities allow us to give “specific attention to the students well below grade level” as we review samples of student work, assessment outcomes, and coordinate on action plans for next steps. Our teachers have a strong bond, with “Teacher to Teacher Trust” as our data trend indicates 100% on our 2016 Learning Environment Survey. Additionally, the survey revealed that our teachers’ commitment to the school innovation, peer collaboration and collective responsibility are all strong, either meeting or exceeding the City Average on the Learning Environment Survey. One of the most effective systems we have in place through our teams is the focus on cultivating school wide instructional practices that all teachers utilize in their classes. In the past, teachers have collectively implemented strategies like Cornell Notes, student organization binders, and vocabulary strategies. Needs: While our systems and structures for teams are strong, as a community we’re struggling with the implementation of coherent curriculum and pedagogy, as cited in our Quality Review from 2016-17. Rated Developing, teachers continue struggle to design and implement instruction that meets the students’ academic needs through student center pedagogy. Teachers need support to integrate student engagement, questioning and discussion protocols, and formative assessment into their classrooms on a daily basis. There is also a need for a deeper understanding of UDL strategies and how to incorporate them into a Regents-aligned course. This qualitative data is reinforced by the data trends in our Danielson ratings. Our average ratings in domains 3 b, 3c and 3d were 2. 48, 2.48 and 2.50 respectively. While there are pockets of effective practices, they are not yet consistent across the school community. That consistency can only come from whole school action plans, and direct support to teachers within their unique content areas and grade levels. Focusing on these aspects of the Danielson Framework in vertical and horizontal teams will allow us to make significant progress in all areas of the school for coherent curricula and pedagogy. As our school’s population of Special Education students and English Language Learners continues to grow, our number of co-taught classes has increased. We currently have ESL and SPED support in 26 of our classes, provided by 6 different staff members. Our SPED and ELL teachers work with the academic departments to differentiate our curriculum and daily learning objectives and this work can be seen across classrooms. Additionally, our 2017-18 School Survey noted that 83% of our teachers talk about instruction with each other and 71% of teachers said they had adequate professional development time to improve their practice. This need is also evidenced in our course pass rates. Currently our pass rates in the four core instructional subjects is 72% and our SPED and ELL students are disproportionately represented in the 28% of students failing. 3  To further support these partnerships we realized the importance of planning time. This year, we changed our professional development schedule to allocate approximately one hour per week exclusively to support co-teaching relationships. This time is also spent learning about co-teaching instructional strategies and sharing best practices. We also have a Special Education coach from our network coming once a week to work with our co-teaching pairs. She will be supporting our teachers by conducting classroom visits and debriefing her observations with the co-teachers. We hope these actions will result in a greater percentage of teachers reporting that they have adequate time to improve their practice and collaborate with their peers as well as improved outcomes for students, evidenced by both course passing rates and Regents scores. We will also work with our Special Education coach to develop professional development offerings around Universally Designed Lessons to support all our learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase our credit accumulation for our special education students from 61% to 66% , and for our English language learner students from 55% to 59% . 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Analyzing Student Work Teacher collaboration that focuses on student work and proficiency through co-teaching meetings and vertical team meetings, led by admin/coach, will be used to plan and assess student activities in order to meet their needs and help students meet performance goals. This is especially useful for Students with Disabilities and for English Language Learners. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Staff September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Department leaders Professional Development: UDL Strategies All Staff September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal, Principal, SPED coach Teachers will receive professional development on instructional strategies aligned with both the Danielson Framework and UDL principles. This learning will happen during our regularly scheduled co-teaching PD time. Classroom Observations ICT partnerships will engage in inter-visitation cycles to share best practices and receive feedback on instructional strategies IEP Reviews Teachers will review IEPs to assess benchmark goals and strategies and to monitor progress through year. The Special Education team will lead PD on effectively using IEPs to plan for the year and how to implement UDL strategies well-suited to those students. All Staff All Staff September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal SPED Liaison, SPED coach Interim Assessments and Data Review All Staff Departments will facilitate interim assessments (mock Regents exams) and review data to make strategic instructional decisions for students with IEPs. We will also conference with teachers around their Scholarship Reports and have them identify data trends among their students and create intervention plans. Principal, All Staff September 2018 - June 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 5  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family engagement is essential for helping students to meet their academic goals. We will continue to reach out to parents during our parent engagement time, working with families to coordinate IEP meetings and review of program offerings and support types in SLT and PTA meetings. We will also utilize our Community Associate and Parent Coordinator to ensure that we have accurate ways to communicate with parents through the mail and via phone. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff will participate in weekly staff development and ICT planning sessions, in addition to time for collaborating and planning implementation of instructional strategies. Fair Student funding and Title I funding will be used to support professional development opportunities and the purchase of supplemental materials.. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administrators will monitor teachers’ ratings across the Danielson Domains in Advance with check ins during the fall and spring semester, using ICT teams will videotape their work and share best practices regularly throughout the year. IEP students’ pass rates will increase 5% in classes taking January Regents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Ratings across domains 3b, 3c, 3d and 1e January 2019 Regents exam scores Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: The 2017 Learning Environment Survey rated Effective School Leadership as 87% positive perception of the principal and school leaders. 100% of teachers communicate that the principal communicates a clear vision for the school, and 93% of parents believe that the principal works to create a sense of community within the school. On curriculum development, 92% of the teachers report they are well coordinated across grade levels, even though the citywide average is 79%. The 2016 Quality Review offers a consistent school rating, with a score of Proficient in Indicator 5.1, evaluating the quality of school-level decisions and making adjustments as needed to increase the coherence of policies and practices across the school. This is the work of the principal and the school leaders that the principal identifies and supports throughout the school year. Needs: As the school enters its fifth year of growth, we are approaching our second full graduating class, which is the first clear look at the quality of the systems, structures and quality of the school. It requires clear and present leadership on all aspects of the school systems and structures to usher students through their high school experience from the first day of 9th grade to the diploma they receive on the graduation stage. School leaders need to maintain their the promising practices they’ve built across the school in curriculum development, instructional practices, data informed decision making, and cultivating a supportive learning environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will create professional development plan as evidenced by .8 increase in teachers’ Advance ratings in Domain 1e (design coherent instruction) from 2.31 to 2.39 and Domain 3c (engaging students in instruction) from 2.39 to 2.47. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Common Core Aligned Curriculum The administration will monitor and support the refinement of Common Core aligned curriculum that is challenging and differentiated to meet the needs of all learners. Adminstrators will set benchmarks for unit plans, curriculum maps, and lesson plan review. All teachers will receive feedback on these documents, aligned with our school and district goals around increasing rigor and literacy skills. Classroom Observations The administration will conduct formal and informal observations and provide teachers with clear, consistent and actionable feedback over the course of the school year, identify action plans for teachers who need additional supports. New teachers will receive bi-weekly mentoring support from Teacher's College and teachers in need of extra support will establish coaching relationships with model teachers. Cycles of Inquiry The administration and teacher teams will oversee the inquiry process led through ongoing intervistation cycles to ensure that all teachers follow through with their professional responsibilities and are able to analyze data to inform instruction. Through these cycles, we will consistently assess for Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Staff September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Leaders All Staff September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher's College, Model Teachers All Staff September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Team Leaders 8 constant instructional strategies throughout all classrooms and implementation of modification strategies. Graduation Watch The administration will monitor and support the guidance department and 12th grade team to track performance of 12th grade students, identify early warning signs that would impede an on time graduation, and work to develop interventions to ensure that every senior graduates, on-tome. Attendance Team The administration will monitor and support the Attendance team to track attendance patterns and trends for all students, identify early warning signs that would impact academic progress and develop interventions to ensure that students avoid becoming chronically absent. Guidance & 12th Grade Team September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Grade Team Leader, Dean of Student Culture Attendance Team September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Attendance Team Leader, Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Every family looks forward to seeing their student move the tassel from one side of the mortar board to the other, but not every family gets the chance. In working closely with our parents and families, we want to be sure students closest network of support understands the goal of college ready graduation, and all of the milestones along the way. By publishing materials for parents and families about the pathway to graduation, we must ensure that all students and families understanding the graduation requirements for credit accumulation, passing Regents, and the options that put them in good standing for college and healthcare professions. We will continue our outreach to families through mailings, on our school’s website, grade level newsletters, and PTA meetings, and parent info-sessions at school events. Because the senior year is so pivotal for students, we will offer special meetings just for our 12th grade families so that they can receive one on one support as they prepare for High School Graduation and opportunities for college and careers. Additionally, important stake holders are invited to "Coffee with the Principal" where school leadership structures are presented and discussed. Families will also receive a hard and electronic copy of our school newsletter which will highlight features from admistrators and staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The administration will devote time and professional resources to supporting the systems and structures that create a strong and healthy learning environment and supports students towards an on time graduation. Where there are gaps in the school structures, the administration will utilize key resources to meet the needs as they arise. Per session 9  will be paid for after school credit recovery and Regents/SAT Prep classes. Additionally, the school will use the budget allocations to seek support from Teacher's College, Kaplan, Elevate Education and additional instructional resources to be sought out during the school year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Using a Graduation Tracking system, Dexpro, the administration, guidance, and 12th grade team will monitor the attendance, credit accumulation, Regents pass rate and behavior of the 12th grade cohort. This tracker will indicate students who are On Track, Almost On Track, and Off Track, and identify their needs. A review of the tracker after each marking period will allow teachers and administrators to monitor and enact interventions when necessary to ensure that all students who have an opportunity to graduate are able to meet their goal. Br February/March 2019, we will assess for a 5% growth in domain 1a, 1e and 3c. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Graduation Tracking System, DEXPRO, Advance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: The 2016 Learning Environment Survey indicated that we have strong Family and Community ties, with 86% of teachers and parents reporting that teachers reach out to parents. This is consistent with Additional Findings from the Quality Review which found that Indicator 3.4 was Proficient for establishing a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families. For outreach, we provide academic progress reports to families after each marking period, in order to communicate student progress throughout the school year. 50% of families participate in student conferences, and teachers take time during their day to make phone calls home in order to update families directly about students’ progress in class. Our school-based website is a source of information for current and prospective families. It gives an overview of our school community, provides a link to Jupiter Grades so families can check in on students' grades and progress, and showcases current and upcoming events where families can get involved with the school community. 73 families attended Curriculum Night for SY2018-2019. Additionally, 104 families attended Orientation in August of 2018, which was nearly double the amount of families who attended the same event for SY2017-2018. Needs: Even though 86% of teachers and parents feel positively about the outreach teachers are making to families, only 76% of parents report being involved in the school. We believe that a proactive and involved parent base will strengthen our school community and will increase student achievement throughout the four years of high school. It can be difficult for parents to participate in the school community when they are trying to balance the pressures of work and family responsibilities, and/or live far away from the school. However, families who are not involved or informed about the expectations of high school or their student's progress miss opportunities to support the child to reach his/her potential. With an aligned approach, the school and the family provide the necessary support students need to reach their goals. We must create more opportunities and cultivate a culture of participation between the school and the family. We will accomplish this in collaboration with the PTA, Parent Coordinator, Partnership Coordinator, and CBOs such as the Student Success Center, operated by the Cypress Hills Local Development Corporation. Our anticipated Parent events are as follows: Curriculum Night (Parent-Teacher Conference in Sept.) – Teachers meet with families and give them a copy of the class syllabus, show them how to log into JupiterED to view grades and go over expectations. 1  Understanding Graduation Requirements & Regents (late Summer and Spring) – This will allow families to understand the credits and exams that are needed for graduation. They will be shown how to calculate their child’s credits and keep track of what classes and Regents are still needed. Navigating JupiterEd (Summer & Spring and on an individual basis as parents visit the school) – Parents are shown how to access Jupiter to view grades and attendance, access this data on their phones, and communicate with teachers. Fall Senior Parent Night (September) – This is an overview of the college application process, deadlines, and activities that students and parents will be working on together. There is an emphasis on both student and parent responsibilities. This year, the event included several different stations on different topics, including paying for college, financial documents, a timeline of the year, and others. AP Parent Night (Fall and Spring) – During this evening event, parents receive information about the AP program at the school, the advantages of participation and any associated costs. FAFSA Nights (twice in the evenings in the fall) – Trained SSC staff are on site to help students and parents create FSA IDs and file their FAFSA applications on the spot. Parent’s Rights (Winter) –This workshop is designed to help parents understand their rights and responsibilities vis-a-vis the public school system Spring Junior Parent Night (February) – This is an introduction to the college process for families of juniors. This event is focused on getting parents and students on the same page regarding expectations, the timeline and deadline of the overall process, and to facilitate important conversations around college location and financial fit. Planning for the Costs of Education (December) – This workshop is designed to provide valuable information to parents related to college savings and related investment options. College and Credit Cards (Spring) – This workshop is an introduction to financial planning (goal setting, budgeting and saving) targeted to seniors and their parents. It is intended to help students to be more financially savvy and to avoid the pitfalls of credit cards. Build Your Own College (Spring) – During this workshop, students and parents will learn about the criteria used to consider a college, including size, location, diversity, academics, and financial aid. Parents will also begin to reflect on their expectations for their son or daughter and thereby be prepared to have open and honest family discussions about best-fit schools. Because the senior year is so pivotal for students, we will offer special meetings exclusively for our 12th grade families so that they can receive one on one support as they prepare for high school graduation, college and career Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2  By June 2019, we will deepen our home-school partnership, as evidenced by a 5% increase in family participation in educational planning meetings and conferences from 55% to 60%. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Increase planning and promotion of the Fall and Spring Student Led Conferences where students present their portfolio of work and their progress to their teachers and families. Through print, digital, and personal recruitment to the event. Survey our community of families to better understand when, where, and how are the best ways for the school to contact them and when it is most convenient for them to participate in school-based activities. This information will help us to plan and organize events that families are more likely to support. All Families All Families All Staff All Staff September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Engage parents and families in a Home Visit where we can make personalized connections between school personnel and family members. All Families September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Principal, Assistant Principal All school materials and meetings will be translated and made accessible to all families in their primary language. Monthly ENL meetings with our families to provide individualized student updates and assist with any documentation or status issues. Families of English Language Learners Parent Coordinator, Principal, Assistant Principal Monthly Meetings September 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Cypress Hills Local Development Cooperation ,Northwell Health Center, Pro Bono Financial Planning Association of Metro NY Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 4  Staff will need time during the summer and outside of the school day for scheduling and conducting Home Visits, preparing for and conducting parent meetings and training, time to prepare students to present during Student Led Conferences, collecting data on parent participation and survey feedback, and time to train staff in the use of School Messenger and social media. Fair Student funding and Title I funding will be used to support home visits. Teacher schedules will adjusted to allow for sufficient time for teachers to meet with families. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 15% increase in families participating in Student Led Conferences, from 63% to 70%. The staff will compile records and documentation such as sign in sheets, calendars, and meeting handouts during the Fall Semester. ● In January 2019, the staff will review the documentation and determine which families have participated in a school event. ● The staff will determine the best strategies to reach out to families during the Spring Semester who have not participated in a school event. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Coordinator Activity Reports; School Events attendance logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students not reading on grade level, students not passing the course, English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities Students not reading on grade level, students not passing the course, English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities Students not reading on grade level, students not passing the course, English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities Students not reading on grade level, students not passing the course, English Language Learners, Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Academic Literacy strategies, Binders, Cornell Notes, Content and Academic Vocabulary, Socractic Seminar, text annotation, graphic organizers, close reading Academic Literacy strategies, Binders, Cornell Notes, Content and Academic Vocabulary, Socractic Seminar, text annotation, graphic organizers, close reading Academic Literacy strategies, Binders, Cornell Notes, Content and Academic Vocabulary, Socractic Seminar, text annotation, graphic organizers, close reading Academic Literacy strategies, Binders, Cornell Notes, Content and Academic Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one-to-one, tutoring Before school, during lunch, after school Small group, one-to-one, tutoring Before school, during lunch, after school Small group, one-to-one, tutoring Before school, during lunch, after school Small group, one-to-one, tutoring Before school, during lunch, after school 6  Students with Disabilities At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students with chronic attendance/tardies, multiple red passes, multiple detentions or suspensions. Vocabulary, Socractic Seminar, text annotation, graphic organizers, close reading Meeting with dean, social worker, home visits, phone calls to parents/guardians, conflict resolution, Student Study Team Small group, one-to-one, Before school, during lunch, after school 7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 15 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. UASCH Students in Temporary Housing are supported with resources such as access to a full-time Social Worker, a backpack with school supplies and books, and additional UASCH uniform attire. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). UASCH is a Title I School. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 8  UASCH is a Title I School. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. UASCH is a Title I School. 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The principal actively recruited the current staff throughout last five years through interviews and recruitment events and only selected staff that were highly qualified in the content they assigned to teach in. Currently, all staff members meet the criteria of being highly qualified. To retain current staff members, principal will meet with all staff members about professional options and programming for the following school year. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The entire staff meets weekly to participate in professional development including the analysis of student performance data and student work. In addition, the staff has incorporated the use of binders, Cornell Notes, Academic and Content vocabulary, Socratic Seminars, Co-Curricular Projects, and Common Core Aligned Units as they work to increase to increase the rigor in classroom instruction and support the development of students’ critical thinking skills. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 0  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers and teacher teams meet with the principal to review and determine the use and selection of appropriate multiple measures used to evaluate student progress. Teachers participate in weekly Accountable Community meetings and are supported in the analysis of student performance results to improve instruction through collaboration and staff development. All AC sessions will allow teachers to choose sessions applicable to their content area. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal 223,907 12,366 6,014 X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,826,279 X 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 2  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. The Urban Assembly School for Collaborative Healthcare The Heartbeat of the Community Parent and Family Engagement Policy Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Urban Assembly School for Collaborative Healthcare, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, ESSA, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. 4  Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Urban Assembly School for Collaborative Healthcare will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ●providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ●actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ●support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 5  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ●schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ●translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ●conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ●holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ●hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ●encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ●supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. The Urban Assembly School for Collaborative Healthcare The Heartbeat of the Community School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent-Student Compact (SPC) 6  The Urban Assembly School for Collaborative Healthcare , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 7  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 8  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn; ● embody UASCH’s core values of Collaboration, Accountability, Compassion, Respect, Follow-Through, and Pride of Purpose. 9  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Currently, we have 64 ELLs and 17 Former ELLs, with 17 ELLs functioning at the Commanding level on the NYSESLAT, 17 ELLs functioning at the Expanding level, 26 ELLs functioning at the Transitioning level, 14 ELLs at the Emerging level and 7 ELLs at the Entering level. According to the results, the majority of our ELLs perform slightly higher in the combined modality of Listening/Speaking than in Reading/Writing. However, many of our students have shown a need for improvement in overall communicative competence as well. This latter finding means that we will integrate modeled talk; partner work, peer tutoring and other strategies, which will help learners, achieve competence and confidence in listening to, and speaking with others. We will also be concentrating on literacy development strategies such as read-aloud, shared reading and writing, guided reading and writing, looking at word study and word forms, cohesive device, vocabulary development, comprehension and so on. Analysis of individual modalities shows a clear need for a concentration on reading and writing skills and strategies among our ELLs: most notably, self-monitoring and self- correcting for accurate language production, making and supporting inferences about information and ideas with reference to features in written texts, and applying learning strategies to acquire information and make texts comprehensible and to examine and interpret a variety of materials. For our Title III programs our ELLs will experience a range of academic English materials while focusing on vocabulary development and literacy and writing skills. ELLs will also receive explicit instruction in writing, concentrating on effective structuring from sentence to essay level. The Title III program will offer academic intervention services to ELL students that need additional support in developing their English language and literacy skills as well as ELLs that are preparing to take the ELA, US History, Living Environment and Global Regents. Services will be offered to a minimum of 20 ELLs for each program. The language of instruction will be English. The AIS class for ELLs will be taught by The English by a licensed ENL teacher and will run on Monday after school and Wednesday before school for one hour beginning November 5, 2018 and ending June 14, 2019. The English through ELA program, taught by a licensed ENL teacher will run on Wednesdays after school for one hour (3:40-4:40) from November 5, 2018 to June 14, 2019. Saturday Academy for Regents support will be taught by a licensed ENL teacher, and Social Studies and Science teachers and will begin on December 8, 2012 and end in mid June. This will be offered to support at-risk ELLs and promote an increase in graduation rates. This program will provide students with supplemental guidance in literacy heavy subjects such as Living Environment, Global Studies, ELA, and US History. The program will run 9 am until 1 pm. The focus of all programs will be on improving academic reading, writing, listening and speaking skills using age-appropriate content-area material. Students will learn reading comprehension strategies and vocabulary as well as strategies for improving their listening and speaking skills. These programs are supplemental and will not supplant regular programming. Funding will also be used to invest in graphic novels designed for ELLs (Grades 6 - 12) to supplement textbook-based instruction and Regents prep in US History and Global History and to facilitate differentiation in instructional inputs. We will also order word to word bilingual 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information dictionaries, English Learner dictionaries, notebooks, chart paper, markers, pencils, pens and other supplies, which will be used specifically in the Title III programs. Regardless of their particular backgrounds, the majority of ELLs will struggle with social and cultural adjustments in school and if the appropriate student supports are put in place to help ease the students’ transition and meet their social and emotional needs, it will result in better student outcomes in terms of attendance, academic achievement and students’ attitudes towards learning. Therefore, in addition to the academic programs that we offer our ELLs, this year we will also focus on providing programs and activities that will help provide our ELLs with social emotional support, a sense of belonging, and build their character and leadership skills. We will run a book club for ELLs that will focus on reading articles books that are high interest to them and through their membership in this club they will also be provided with opportunities to participate in cultural enrichment opportunities. We will also run a monthly lunchtime conversation club for our ELLs that will include English Proficient students that have signed up to be mentors to our ELLs. These clubs will be run by a licensed ENL teacher, the school counselor and the Dean. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development coaching and workshops will be provided by the Internationals Network, The Center for Integrated Training and Education, and our veteran ENL Teachers. Monthly In-house professional development sessions for the whole staff will focus on integrating language and content to enable students to develop their academic language in all content areas while deepening their knowledge of content, methodologies in making content accessible to ELLs, and facilitating meaningful collaboration between content and ESL teachers. Because we follow an integrational approach at UASCH, all of our teachers work with ELLs. Thus, all workshops will be offered to all staff, including ENL-licensed teachers on a monthly basis. The first workshop, to be held on November 8th from 3:00-4:00 PM, will be an introduction to working with ELLs in mainstream classrooms. An outside coach from Internationals will be conducting observations of classes on November 1 in preparation for subsequent workshops. During this “needs assessment” the representative from Internationals will visit classrooms and debrief with the principal and the content area teachers to discuss observations and the implications for improving practice. Workshops following the observational day will be held on November 27 (topic :Three Essential Strategies for Supporting ELL and December 13 (topic: Scaffolding & Differentiation for Academic Language Proficiency). Each workshop will be followed by a day of coaching during which teachers from specific content areas will have the opportunity to work with a coach to integrate what they have learned into existing lesson plans. In addition, many staff members – including ENL licensed teachers - will be attending the Internationals series of workshops on November 6th. 2  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: In addition to being invited to all Parent related events and interactions with the school, we would like to increase our Parent involvement for the parents of ELL students by offering workshops throughout the year that address the needs of immigrant families and their children. The families of our ELLs will be invited to attend workshops developed and facilitated by our ENL teachers, Grace Starr, Emily Lessem, and Akilah Elie, as well as by outside facilitators from local community organizations. Funds will be used to develop the content and execute workshops on the following themes, "Supporting my child's language development at home", “Navigating the NYC School System and College Planning for my Child”, “Accessing Resources for my child and my family”, “Resume Building and Job Applications”. During these workshops, participants will be role-playing parent teacher conferences, learning language needed to interact and interface with the child’s school and teachers, understanding how to read their child’s report card and how to access their child’s academic profile on the computer as well as receiving clarifying information on credit/graduation requirements and Regents examinations. Because experience has shown that the extensive working hours of our ELLs parents often does not allow for visits to the school during normal school hours, we will offer these programs on evenings, from 6:00 to 8:00 PM or weekends from 10:00 to 12:00 noon on December 1, February 9 and May 4 to encourage attendance. In addition, we will be sending out forms with requests for information on the times the parents are available and will structure future workshops around that information. If necessary, we will hold multiple sessions so that all parents have an opportunity to attend the workshops. Parents will be invited via automated and personal calls and workshops will be provided in English and Spanish and Bengali and Arabic translations will be provided in necessary. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. N/A N/A Supplies and materials 3 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 19 School Name UA School for Collaborative Healthcare Borough Brooklyn School Number 764 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Candace Hugee Coach Duane Wardley ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Irving Estella Teacher/Subject Area Camille Ferrier/ELA Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Fred Walsh Assistant Principal type here Coach type here School Counselor Raquel August Parent Beatriz Vivas Parent Coordinator Kara Hamilton Field Support Center Staff Member Olga DeFilippis Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 334 5 Total number of ELLs 60 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 17.96%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP), as a close-reading assessment for early literacy skills assessment. This assessment provides literacy grade level equivalencies and is adminstered three times during the school year to measure student progress. According to the data received from this assessment, our ELL students are underperforming in the areas of literacy. On average, they are reading on grade levels that are 3-4 years below their current grade level. To address this issue, all teachers are focusing on applying literacy strategies across all content areas with a focus on vocabulary development and text annotation. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? N/! 6  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? As the school does not have historical data, we are monitoring student progress through the analysis of student performance on the DRP and periodic assessments in addition to academic progress and teacher created assessments via Skedula for ESL students specifically. Leadership discusses the progress of ELLs and specific strategies for teaching ELLs during weekly one-on-one teacher meetings 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? n/A 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based on test data, the school has 50% of their ELLs identified as beginners. As a result, the school is implementing several litearcy initiatives. This includes literacy across content areas - reinforcing writing and vocabulary skills, text annotation, and supports that are specific to beginners (self-contained ESL). 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? N/A Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. All students are in content classes, and the ESL teacher pushes-in to each of their content classes. In addition, the students receive self-contained ESL. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Each of our ESL students receives 540 minutes of ESL instruction per week. The ESL teacher pushes into the ELA classes to provide support with reading, writing, and listening. The ESL teacher also follows the students to their other content classes and provides suppport to the content area teacher who are also using SDAIE and SIOP strategies to support the beginning students. Both content and ESL teachers work on curriculum planning and scaffolding. 7  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Instruction in the content areas is delivered in English using SDAIE (Specially Designed Academic Instruction in English) and SIOP (Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol) strategies such as Content and Language Objectives, scaffolding of lessons, front loading of academic and content vocabulary, summary and sentence frames, and graphic organizers. Content teachers work with ESL teacher to ensure students are both developing their academic language while meeting the demand of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content and ESL teacher also use ESL glossaries from NYSED for content areas, bilingual dictionaries and assignments are offered in native language in both content and ESL classes. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ESL teacher is working on argumentative essays for ELA class (citing evidence/claims); students write in Spanish and work with the teacher around ELA scaffolds. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. With our SIFE students, the ESL teacher works with our ELA teacher to support the student in the area of writing. He also receives daily in-class support and tutoring in his ELA and Math classes and in addition to participating in after-school tutorial. b. With the 5 students who have been in US schools less than three years, the ESL teacher pushes into the ELA classes to provide support with reading, writing, and listening. The ESL teacher also follows the students to their other content classes and provide suppport to the content area teacher who are also using SDAIE and SIOP strategies to support the beginning students. Both content and ESL teachers work on curriculum planning and scaffolding. c. Currently the school does not have any students identified as ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years. d. Currently the school has two students identified as long term ELLs. e. Currently the school does not have any students identified as former ELLs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Currently the school had 1 student identified as ELL-SWDs. The staff would work with the Special Education teacher and ESL teacher to identify and implement supports as described in the student's IEP. Translation services would also be provided to the student's family during the annual review of the IEP and routine monitoring of student progress. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Currently the school has 1 student identified as ELL-SWDs and the Special Education and ESL teacher work together in their instructional planning to support the student in achieve their IEP goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs are provided targeted intervention in ELA and Math during the day and after-school including after-school enrichment and tutorials. ELLs are also provided with the opportunity to attend academic intervention and tutoring programs during the 8  day for all content areas. The school is currently in its first year of operation and will continue to work on adding additional supports and targeted interventions based on student need. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The school is currently in its second year of operation and will continue to work on adding additional supports and supplemental interventions as additional grade levels are added based on student need and parent feedback. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are given equal access to all school programs including after-school enrichment and tutorials. ELLs are also provided with the opportunity to attend academic intervention and tutoring programs during the day. The school is currently in its first year of operation and will continue to work on adding additional supports and supplemental services as additional grade levels are added. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Teachers are using a variety of instructional materials to support ELLs including ESL glossaries from NYSED for content areas, bilingual dictionaries, teacher created materials, SmartBoards in all content areas, iPads, and translation software 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the ESL classroom the goal is to assist students to develop proficiency in academic classes taught in English. The native language is used when possible to support the learning of English and of academic content in English, but overall academic instruction is deliveried in English 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The curriculum used by the ESL teacher in not age or grade specific and is designed to address the needs of the students. The services and support students receive is based on their proficiency levels as evidenced on the NYSELAT. The materials are differentiated by level not by grade and are teacher created. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Teachers are using a variety of instructional materials to support ELLs including ESL glossaries from NYSED for content areas, bilingual dictionaries, teacher created materials, SmartBoards in all content areas, iPads, and translation software 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). This program is designed to introduce students to the culture, protocols and policies of the school. It also provides students with the opportunity to meet and interact with their teachers in a low presssure environment. The are encouraged to build relationships with their Advisory teacher and meet other students prior to the beginning of the school year. New ELLs who are enroll throughout the school year are assigned to an Advisory who supports that students and helps them connect to the supports and culture of the school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The school is currently in its second year of operation and does not currently provide language electives to ELLs. The school plans to offer Spanish to ELLs beginning next year. 18. For schools with dual language programs: 9  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. All staff have attended or will attend city-wide professional development on ELL initiatives, mandates, and instructional strategies. Teacher have also participated in on site professional development during Accountable Community meetings on Mondays with a focus on SDAIE and SIOP strategies. 2. All staff have participated and will participate in professional development on explicit vocabulary instruction, text annotation, and AVID strategies such as Cornell Notes and Costa's Levels of Questions. 3. During the month of December and January, all staff participated ELL training every Monday between 2:40 and 4 pm, and every Tuesday between 3:20 and 3:55 pm. with a focus on academic and socio-emotional strategies and supports for ELLs 1. All staff have attended or will attend city-wide professional development on ELL initiatives, mandates, and instructional strategies. Teacher have also participated in on site professional development during Accountable Community meetings on Mondays with a focus on SDAIE and SIOP strategies. 2. All staff have participated and will participate in professional development on explicit vocabulary instruction, text annotation, and AVID strategies such as Cornell Notes and Costa's Levels of Questions. 3. During the month of December and January, all staff participated ELL training every Monday between 2:40 and 4 pm, and every Tuesday between 3:20 and 3:55 pm. with a focus on academic and socio-emotional strategies and supports for ELLs 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 1. All staff have attended or will attend city-wide professional development on ELL initiatives, mandates, and instructional strategies. Teacher have also participated in on site professional development during Accountable Community meetings on Mondays with a focus on SDAIE and SIOP strategies. 2. All staff have participated and will participate in professional development on explicit vocabulary instruction, text annotation, and AVID strategies such as Cornell Notes and Costa's Levels of Questions. 3. During the month of December and January, all staff participated ELL training every Monday between 2:40 and 4 pm, and every Tuesday between 3:20 and 3:55 pm. with a focus on academic and socio-emotional strategies and supports for ELLs 1. All staff have attended or will attend city-wide professional development on ELL initiatives, mandates, and instructional strategies. Teacher have also participated in on site professional development during Accountable Community meetings on Mondays with a focus on SDAIE and SIOP strategies. 2. All staff have participated and will participate in professional development on explicit vocabulary instruction, text annotation, and AVID strategies such as Cornell Notes and Costa's Levels of Questions. 3. During the month of December and January, all staff participated ELL training every Monday between 2:40 and 4 pm, and every Tuesday between 3:20 and 3:55 pm. with a focus on academic and socio-emotional strategies and supports for ELLs 0  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents of ELLs can monitor their student's progress through Skedula and teachers make weekly contact home. The DOE provides translation services for parents of ELLs. The staff also makes arrangements to meet with parents at their home or at the school based on a time that works for the parent. Parents of ELLs are also to be involved with the school's PA/PTA and SLT. Our Parent Association along with our Parent Coordinator are currently working to identify a Community Based Organization to help provide workshops and other services for our parents. The Parent Coordinator sends home a survey that asks parents to specify the workshops and programs in which they maybe interested in participating. The DOE provides translation services so that all surveys can be translated in the native language of the parents. Our staff conducts home visits to all students including ELLs during Ocotber and Novemebr, and our Parent Association is working on organizing outreach activities and workshops to get more parents involved based on feedback from parent surveys. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs can monitor their student's progress through Skedula and teachers make weekly contact home. The DOE provides translation services for parents of ELLs. The staff also makes arrangements to meet with parents at their home or at the school based on a time that works for the parent. Parents of ELLs are also to be involved with the school's PA/PTA and SLT. Our Parent Association along with our Parent Coordinator are currently working to identify a Community Based Organization to help provide workshops and other services for our parents. The Parent Coordinator sends home a survey that asks parents to specify the workshops and programs in which they maybe interested in participating. The DOE provides translation services so that all surveys can be translated in the native language of the parents. Our staff conducts home visits to all students including ELLs during Ocotber and Novemebr, and our Parent Association is working on organizing outreach activities and workshops to get more parents involved based on feedback from parent surveys. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. UASCH is a new school that opened in September 2014 with its first group of 9th grade students. Each year, the school will add an additonal grade until it is at capacity as a 9-12 CTE high school. The school will continue to develop and revise the LAP as additional grade levels are added and based on student enrollment and need. 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Candace Hugee, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: UASCH School DBN: 19K764 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Candace Hugee Title Principal Assistant Principal Kara Hamilton Parent Coordinator Irving Estella ENL/Bilingual Teacher Beatriz Vivas Parent Camille Ferrier/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Duane Wardley Coach Coach Raquel August School Counselor Fred Walsh Olga DeFilippis Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 19K764 School Name: UASCH Superintendent: Fred Walsh The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Estella ESL Teacher Yes Yes conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Irving * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Within the first month of school, we reviewed ATS and blue emergency card contact information to determine which students came from non-English speaking homes. We conducted interviews with students concerning their home language and any translation services parents or guardians might need. Response letters and forms were sent home to assess for limited English speaking parents. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 4  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral For many families, Spanish is the primary language spoken at home. All of these parents receive notifications in English and Spanish, although most are fluent in both languages. These results were shared at a SLT meeting that included representatives from the Parents Association. Results were also shared at a staff meeting in the beginning of the school year. N/A N/A N/A Spanish Unknown 100% 100% N/A N/A N/A N/A N./A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. October 2017 Big Word Bilingual personnel on staff including pedagogues, student/family support personnel, paraprofessionals, and members of the School Leadership Team address these needs with translation services in writing for communication sent or mailed home and for literature available about the school at school functions. At Parent Association meetings, parents may also volunteer to translate and facilitate 5  small group discussions for parents who are limited in their ability to speak English. Parents are informed in writing of the availability of translators and of their right to use an adult friend or family member to provide translation. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Professional and paraprofessional staff translates at school meetings, Parents’ Association meetings, and for parent-teacher conferences when necessary. Signage in the building is in both English and Spanish, including the names of key personnel who can assist non-English speaking parents in addressing needs at school. N/A N/A N/A October 2017 Big Word N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Use of interpreter or translated documents Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Professional Development 6  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Welcome Poster, Parents' Bill of Rights, Parents Guide to Language Access, and the Language ID Guide will be posted and distributed at the beginning of the school and reviewed with families at the beginning of the year. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will gather feedback on the quality and availability of services from the annual school survey in addition to feedback from parents at the Parent Teacher Association meetings, School Leadership Team meetings, and parent-teacher conferences. 7 
