 16K765 School Name: NELSON MANDELA HIGH SCHOOL Principal: TABARI BOMANI   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Nelson MandelaSchool for Social Justice High School 331600011765 Day High School 1700 Fulton Street Brooklyn 112`13 School Number (DBN): 16K765 718 804 6805 Phone Number: 7188046808 Fax: Tabari Z Bomani TBomani@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 16 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Tabari Bomani Lester Morris LavinaYoung Lester Morris Ernestine Greene Niawillis Joshua Romero None District Information Janice Ross Superintendent: 1396 Broadway Brooklyn 11221 JRoss11@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 455-4635 Phone Number: 718 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn North Bernadette Fitzgerald FSC: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Room 501 Brooklyn New York11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: BFitzge2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-3954 Phone Number: 719 935-2382 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Tabari Z Bomani Lester Morris LavinaYoung TykesiaHollman MishelLopez NiaWillis Joshua Romero none Jocelyn James GamilaRichards Ernestine Greene *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent/ Parent/ Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lester Morris Lesley Addison Naquan Braswell Gary Lechtrecker Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview Nelson Mandela School for Social Justice (NMSSJ) opened September 2014. Borne out of the NYC Young Men’s Initiative, Nelson Mandela School for Social Justice (an EPICMandela School) challenges all students to dream big and support them in designing their future. We recognize that each student is an individual, and therefore provide a series of learning experiences that equip young people to walk their unique paths. We honor and integrate the cultures of   our communities to make learning relevant, responsive, and accessible, as we develop citizens with a positive sense of self, ready to stand for social justice. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. All graduates of Nelson Mandela School for Social Justice will be college and career ready as we provide a meaningful pathway to lifelong learning for every student. By fostering the boldness to dream and by developing a commitment to inner growth and outward transformation, our graduates will be ready to design their own futures. Nelson Mandela School for Social Justice (NMSSJ) has a student population that is 90% African American with 85% of our students qualifying for free and reduced lunch. As part of the EPICMandela schools (birthed out of the ESI School Design Fellowship), the Nelson Mandela School for Social Justice emphasize the following key areas. I. Instruction: Culturally relevant and purposeful learning experiences leading to the mastery of skills.  Competency-based framework integrating academic, social-emotional, college and career-readiness learning goals.  Personalized learning pathways that challenge students while providing them with targeted support.  Ongoing and varied assessments that afford students multiple and diverse opportunities to achieve and demonstrate mastery.  Integrated technology and data use to personalize learning and facilitate access to resources.  Early College and workplace learning opportunities for students that form a “readiness bridge” into post- secondary opportunities.  Youth development practices and strategies that support students through mentoring, rites of passage and restorative justice. II. Staffing: Culturally relevant staffing and development based on students’ real-time needs  Flexible adult roles and schedules that accommodate students’ varying needs.  Personalized professional learning plans that support the continuous growth of our staff. 0   Adult competencies based on EPIC learning priorities and students’ needs which serve as bases for staff selection and professional development.  Leadership pipelines that foster professional growth, collaboration and mentor ship.  Holistic and purposeful evaluation that emphasizes effective teamwork and individual growth and development. III. School community/ culture: Culturally relevant environments that nurture growth, community and positive identity  Community-based partnerships connecting services, supports and real-world learning opportunities.  Advocacy and activism that surface and address constraints that hinder student growth.  Family engagement that ensures real partnership and shared leadership by the community. Support services and operations systems that remove barriers to learning for students. . Strengths: The schools strengths fall into the following areas: The schools approach to culture building, discipline, and social emotional support results in an inclusive culture that is conducive to student and adult learning. Our Harambee Code of conduct, use of restorative justice and morning circles, along with the Rites of Passage and advisory systems, ensure that every student is known well by an adult and a team of adults who coordinate guidance and develop student plans align with student needs. The use of resources (technology, coaches, and partnerships) and other organizational decisions are aligned to support the school instructional goals as in evident student tasks/products. Partners work alongside staff in developing the Rites of Passage program and advisory curriculum. Technology purchased allows for student access during instruction. The school is using resources to develop a new classroom position entitled Learning Coach creating the potential for flexible teaching structures in classrooms (parallel, stations, small group, lead/recorder) based on student needs. The school leaders consistently communicate high expectations to the entire staff, provide staff training and support, and are developing a system of accountability for those expectations. School leaders and staff consistently communicate expectations that are connected to path to college and career readiness. These expectations are embodied in the EPIC Mandela Model/framework of academic and behavioral competencies. Ongoing feedback to help families understand student progress towards those expectations is evident in the online assessment tool, regular advisory meetings/goal setting, and in restorative justice/guidance meetings. NMSSJ has establishing a community lounge for faculty and parents to in order provide access for families. Resource/Organization List The development of EPIC High Schools is a product of wide research and thought partnership with numerous experts and organizations across the relevant domain areas. Additionally, EPIC is forging strategic alliances with local and national organizations that will support both the implementation of these schools as well as broader advocacy around 1  policies related to Black and Latino youth. Institutional Support Over the last four years NMSSJ have worked with various partners (Open Society Foundation to Expanded Success Initiative, Eskolta, etc.). currently, NMSSj has narrowed and consolidated our list of partners in an effort to support a laser focus on our school improvement plan.  ● United Federation of Teachers : Nelson Mandela School for Social Justice is also a UFT Prose school and works closely with Prose UFT. ● Young Men’s Initiative Co-Designers ● Brotherhood/Sister Sol: Original co-developers of our ROP curriculum. ● Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility: Co-designers of our Restorative Practice Approach. Future PD provider. ● NYC Writing Project : PD provider to staff: Writing and literacy strategies Remaining EPIC Schools 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. X During the 2018-2019 school year NMSSJ will pay close attention to our cohort U graduating class. Cohort U will be our second graduating class, and we are determined to surpass our graduation rate from last year. Currently a large portion of our first cohort U students are off track for graduation: missing credits and/or missing regents. Additionally, one of our special populations are our SPED students: in particular our students who are in self contained class. For our SPED students we will develop a clear academic transition plan that will seek to move SPED students closer to passing assigned regents and identifying college and career goals. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Areas of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress in 2017-2018: Supportive Environment : During the 2017-2018 school year r, we continued to strengthen our culture of support, mutual trust and positive attitudes that support the academic and personal growth of students and adults. During 2017-2018, NMSSJ expanded our use of restorative justice practices by including parents in our meetings and circles. Additionally, in 2017-2018 NMSSJ increased our commitment to the use of culturally relevant education. In The area of culturally relevance, during the 2017-2018 school year we increased the number of elective Social Justice class, established a Black Lives matter chapter at the school, held our second annual Social Justice conversation with Manhattan Students, etc. Additionally, NMSSj launched it's independent reading project and created mini libraries in classrooms that have CRE texts. During our third year, NMSSJ continued, and increased, our commitment to selecting culturally relevant texts and projects across the curricula. We used CRE texts and tasks, and designed school wide ceremonies that fostered student cultures as assets. These elements supported students overall academic and social emotional growth. 2  Effective School Leadership – The school leaders continue to communicate high expectations to the entire staff, provide staff training and support, and are strengthening our system of accountability for those expectations. School leaders and staff consistently communicate expectations that are connected to college and career readiness for our students. These expectations are embodied in the EPIC/Mandela Model framework of academic and behavioral competencies. This past year, we continue to give ongoing feedback to help families understand student progress towards those expectations. During Advance observations, teachers received immediate and actionable feedback on their instructional progress related to this particular domain. In addition, the school leadership identified financial and human resources to procure the services of instructional coaches from the New York City Writing Project and Redesign in an effort to adopt and improve school wide instruction. Additionally, the school leader strengthened the schools relationship with Transfer School Common Core Institute (TSCCI). through the TSCCI the school leader was able to supply NMSSJ staff with instructional coaching and Professional Learning from ReDesign. The school leader was also able to engage EsKolta; Eskolta continued to help with the further development, review, edit and evaluation of new rubrics for the academic and social-emotional attainments used by teachers. Strong Family-Community Ties: The school continues to bring and use resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families , artists, and community-based organizations . The involvement of families in Restorative Circles has helped increased the participation of parents and guardians, and has positively impacted the school wide community. During the 2016-2017 NMSSJ Parent Coordinator created several opportunities/events geared toward strengthening the schools relationship with our students families and the surrounding community; paint and sips, holiday lunches, etc. helped to strengthen our relationship. At the end of the year, parents were invited to participate (as a council of elders) in our end of the year naming ceremony for our 9th grade class. NMSSJ PTA and Parent Coordinator worked closely to begin the process of the PTA opening up their own bank account, establishing fund raisers, etc. . NMSSJ continues to work closely with the other schools, students and staff on the campus. Besides the effectiveness of the campus building council, NMSSJ continues to work and interact with the other schools on the campus . These activities have strengthened our connection and ties with the surrounding community. Areas of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school will focus in 2018-2019: (1) Rigorous Instruction By June 2019, 95% of NMSSJ Teachers will demonstrate consistent use of technology at the Modification level on the SAMR Framework when developing, implementing and assessing daily task, formative assessments and end of unit Performance task. This consistent use of technology will be demonstrated through Unit plans, Lesson Plans and informal and formal observations. As a result, the smart use of technology will increase Mandela scholars acquisition of content knowledge and academic skills which will be evidenced by an 10% increase on the Algebra 1 and Living Environment Regents (2) Collaborative Teams By June 2019, 90% of our teachers, through the work of their content teams, will identify high leveraged content based and Social Emotional Power Skills and their accompanying rubrics that all team members will use when 3  designing units, formative assessments and summative Performance Task. As a result, teachers in their content teams will communicate a coherent and aligned set of expectations around mastery of the identified skills; as evidenced by end of unit Summative Performance Task assessments. (3) Effective Leadership By June of 2019, 85% of our teachers will have participated in or hosted a teacher led professional development, using data from and about our school, around implicit bias, equity and/or race. As a result, teachers will demonstrate their increased knowledge of, and response to, how these elements impact instruction, assessments , classroom management and discipline through the development of Culturally responsive classroom environment; as evidenced by their lessons, unit plans, inter visitation logs and Advance observations. (4) Supportive Environment: By June 2019, 90% of the staff will use the NMSSJ Values and Behaviors document to assess students social emotional and academic behavioral development of the students in their class. As a results students will have a clearer sense of the academic an social emotional behaviors that are expected in the classrooms, and through out the school as evidenced by a 15% reduction of incident in the classrooms and a 10% reduction in overall suspensions and removals. (5) Strong Family and Community Ties: By June 2019, at least 80% of NMSSJ guardians/parents and families will attend at least two community events sponsored by the NMSSJ the NMSSJ school community. As a result, parents/guardians support for and collaboration with the school will increased as evidenced by a 15% increase of parent participation on the school Environment Survey with positive and supportive responses. 4  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 16K765 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 273 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 15 15 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 4 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 78.0% % Attendance Rate 76.6% % Reduced Lunch 1.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.5% 11.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.25 13% 33% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 34 35 72.4% 1.5% 25.3% 83.5% 1.1% 3.3% 2 27% 6 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Administration and staff reviewed PPO feedback,results of Superintendent walk troughs along with the relevant student data like student credit accumulation; End of the Year Performance Task Assessment; the 2018 January and June regents results; student’s responses to internal surveys and student’s attendance trends, as well as the success of our first graduating cohort's data (on track or off track as of September 2017, numbers of studens who were able to graduate, etc. ). After an analysis of this data, it became clear that teachers at NMSSJ create and use assessments, rubrics, and grading policies that are aligned with the schools framework, and that these elements along with other data, provide some feedback to students and teachers regarding progress toward goals. However, while staff at NMSSJ have made significant strides towards these goals, the on boarding of new staff and the remaining inconsistencies among current staff offer specific enough actionable feedback to provide clear next steps for improvement and achievement. Strengths: Innovative instructional model   Culturally Relevant/Responsive Environment   A focus on the mastery of skills and competencies  A focus on literacy across the content areas. Smart use of technology Priority needs  Creation of cohesive structures around the use of technology as an essential aspect of rigorous instruction. Review and revision of clear and cohesive instructional strategies Developing and implementing strategies for the use of technology for formative and summative assessments and actionable feedback for students; particularly around skills acquisition and skills gap. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 6  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Rigorous Instruction By June 2019, 95% of NMSSJ Teachers will demonstrate consistent use of technology at the Modification level on the SAMR Framework when developing, implementing and assessing daily task, formative assessments and end of unit Performance task. This consistent use of technology will be demonstrated through Unit plans, Lesson Plans and informal and formal observations. As a result, the smart use of technology will increase Mandela scholars acquisition of content knowledge and academic skills which will be evidenced by an 10% increase on the June 2019 Algebra 1 and Living Environment Regents 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Capturing of Data around technology use, needs, etc. particularly around rigorous task, formative assessments and feedback . Develop PD plan for the 2018-2019 school year that includes at least two professional development opportunities focused on skills based instruction , rigorous task development and smart use of technology; using SAMR as a guide. Develop schedule and protocol for targeted SAMR learning walks; engage in targets walks with feedback to teachers SPED Team will evaluate how technology use can be adapted for SWDs in both the ICT classes and Special Class. SPED team will also develop appropriate scaffolds to be used in classes 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Whole Staff September 1, 2018- January 18, 2019 School leaders and instructional cabinet Whole Staff September Administrative team 24,2018 -June 26 th 2019 PD Committee Whole Staff December Administrative team 15 2018-May 1 2019 Whole Staff October SPED team 2018-February 1, 2019 Administrative team How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. X Saturday Meetings with Parents: Two Saturdays every month beginning November 2018-May 2019 PTA meetings with parents around technology and rigorous instruction student's symposiums: Spring 2019 Achieve Now Academy Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 8  School's budget PTA Funds through Fund raisers Common Planning time Per Session Pro Rata applied for the Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 16, 2018 entire staff would have participated in at least one professional development around current technology use and SAMR Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 1. SAMR Checklist used by Administration During Target Walk troughs 2. Surveys and questionnaires at the end of professional development experiences 3. Review of teacher's professional development journals . Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Administration and staff reviewed PPO feedback,results of Superintendent walk troughs along with school's environment survey the relevant student’s responses to internal surveys and student’s attendance trends and answers on our school's Environment Survey. After an analysis of this data, it became clear that while we have successfully strengthen our culture of support, mutual trust and positive attitudes, which support the academic and personal growth of students and adults, . During 2017-2018, NMSSJ expanded our use of restorative justice practices by including parents in our meetings and circles. NMSSJ Additionally, NMSSJ increased our commitment to the use of culturally relevant and social justice education by increasing the number of social justice electives offered to our students. During the 2017-2018 School year NMSSJ continued it's commitment to the development of culturally relevant and academically rigorous events for the NMSSJ scholars. NMSSJ students participated in the second annual NMSSJ and Manhattanville College social justice discussion, NMSSJ participated in workshops and activities sponsored by the Black Lives Matter NYC organization, etc. NMSSj continued the work around helping teachers increase their use of CRE tex; a central part of this process was the launch of the Mandela research center at NMSSJ. Lastly, NMSSJ continued our use of our student and parent pledge that articulates clear behavioral expectations for NMSSJ scholars. These elements supported students overall academic and social emotional growth. However, a review of our suspension data, incident reports and student surveys reveal that elements of our supportive environment, culture for learning and expectations around academic and social emotional behavior doesn't "live" in key areas of our school. The on boarding of new staff and the remaining inconsistencies among current staff offer specific enough actionable feedback to provide clear next steps for improvement and achievement. Strengths:  Culturally Relevant/Responsive Environment  Use of Restorative Practice  CORE and Rites of Passage (Advisory)   A focus on the mastery of skills and competencies  A focus on literacy across the curriculum Focus of Social Emotional Development Priority Needs:    Further Reduction in suspensions. Increase student credit accumulation and regents passing . Increase opportunities for students who are ready to advance their learning. 0   Review and revise school's code of conduct and culture for learning.  Clarify the academic and social emotional behaviors  Create and launch a NMSSJ monitoring tool for student engagement and academic/social behavior and development Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of the staff will use the NMSSJ Values and Behaviors document to assess students social emotional and academic behavioral development of the students in their class. As a results students will have a clearer sense of the academic an social emotional behaviors that are expected in the classrooms, and through out the school as evidenced by a 15% reduction of incident in the classrooms and a 10% reduction in overall suspensions and removals. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? . Review and revision of the NMSSJ SEL and tools designed to monitor them: Attainment 51 behavior monitoring/self-reflection tool, SEl Rubrics, etc. Whole School Development, dissemination, explanation and implementation of NMSSJ Values and Behaviors tool Whole school Creation and implementation of monitoring/assessment tools, celebrations and recognitions and SPED department tuning of documents and tools. Whole School September 2018-October 30th, 2018 October 10 2018-November 2018 On going Administration School Counselors NMSSJ Cabinet Restorative Deans Administration Cabinet School Counselors SPED Coordinator and Administration school counselors X 3b – Parent and Family Engagement X X How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. By October 30th NMSSJ parents will receive a letter outlining the Values and Academic and Social Emotional Behaviors. 2. During the first PTA meeting for the 2018-2019 school year parents will be given an opportunity to review tool. 3. By November 2018 Parents will be invited to celebrations honoring students academic and/or social emotional behaviors. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2  School Budget ESI Social Emotional Attainments Town Hall celebrations OF SEL AND ACADEMIC BEHAVIORS Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 NMSSJ staff will plan and implement two opportunities to recognize and celebrate student achievement as defined by the NMSSJ Values and Academic/Social Emotional Behavior tool. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NMSSJ Values and Academic/Social Emotional Behavior tool. ESI SEL Attainments (Skills) and rubrics Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Administration and staff reviewed PPO feedback on NMSSJ teams, agendas from content team meetings, review of content team deliverable, the results of Superintendent walkthroughs along with relevant school based data like End of the Year Performance Task Assessment; the 2016 June regents results; student’s and teacher’s responses to internal surveys. After an analysis of this data, it became clear that grade team meetings and collaboration among teachers/staff allowed for greater cohesiveness, which helped to positively impact student achievement. Grade teams were able top identify shared strategies (Think Pair Share tool), develop skills targeted instruction (using Regents ISA), etc. through the common planning time team meetings. Although the school’s schedule allowed for common planning time for grade teams, there wasn’t an effective cohesive protocol for looking at students’ work. The on boarding of new staff and the remaining inconsistencies among current staff offers specific enough actionable feedback to provide clear next steps for improvement and achievement. Strengths: School schedule that allows for daily common planning time. Co-facilitate advisory(CORE and Rites of Passage Program). Culturally Relevant and Responsive Events including students and staff. Sharing of instructional strategies Staff Collaborate around restorative practice and the use of circles to restore relationships among/between students and staff. Priority area: Review and revise teacher teams and empower them to make key decisions around student achievement . Shared protocol for looking at student data to surface skills gaps, instructional needs, implicit bias, opportunities for CRE and Social Justice based learning, etc. Incorporation of shared Rubrics 4  Creation of an equity team, curriculum committee and PD teacher team Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of our teachers, through the work of their content teams, will identify high leveraged content based and Social Emotional Power Skills and their accompanying rubrics that all team members will use when designing units, formative assessments and Summative Performance Task. As a result, teachers in their content teams will communicate a coherent and aligned set of expectations around mastery of the identified skills; as evidenced by end of unit Summative Performance Task assessments. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Review and revision of teacher teams; creation of an equity team, curriculum team and PD team Identification of Power Skills (attainments): academic and Social Emotional and their corresponding rubrics; these Power Skills (attainments) will be measured by all teachers, regardless of content area. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Whole Staff September 7 2018-October 15, 2018 Whole staff October 2018-November 2018 Administration and Cabienet Teacher Teams/Administration collect and review student work with a focus on the Power Skills and their relationship to content and skills acquisition. Whole staff on-going Administration and teacher leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. X Communicate to parents our renewed focus on Social Emotional learning and Development. During Saturday meetings with Parents discussed Academic and Social Emotional Power Skills. Work with PTA to develop Social Emotional Power Skills at home tools: Ways students can express the mastery of these skills at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School budget for PM school and Saturday Academy.   Apply for Achievement Academy Grant  New York City Writing Project.   PD opportunities around curriculum design. Instructional support organization. 6   Allocations will be continuously made for per session, per diem or Pro Rata to ensure implementation of our plan. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. . By February 16th 2019 teacher team will begin using a shared protocol to look at student work with a focus on Power Skills . . . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Codification document, coaching logs,assessments, assessment data, Unit Plans with the identified Power Skills. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of the schools PPO feedback, Advance observations, teacher's final MOTP score reports and regents passing data reveal both the strengths related to effective leadership, and the work we need to focus on. The school leaders continue to communicate high expectations to the entire staff, provide staff training and support, and are strengthening our system of accountability for those expectations. School leaders and staff consistently communicate expectations that are connected to college and career readiness for our students. These expectations are embodied in the EPIC/Mandela Model framework of academic and behavioral competencies. This past year, we continue to give ongoing feedback to help families understand student progress towards those expectations. During the 2017-2018 school year leadership reviewed and revised NMSSJ school wide lesson plan and Unit Plan templates, developed exemplars of Performance Task with student work and furthered the development of rubrics for the schools comoptencies/attainments. During Advance observations, teachers received immediate and actionable feedback on their instructional progress. In addition, the school leadership identified financial and human resources to procure the services of instructional coaches from the New York City Writing Project and Redesign in an effort to adopt and improve school wide instruction. School Successes  Professional Development around the implementation of Summative Performance Task  Development and use of Rubrics: Eskolta School's priority needs:  Training in implicit bias  Development of a bias team   PD around curriculum development and performance task implementation apply to be part of College Access for All. . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 8  By June of 2019, 85% of our teachers will have participated in or hosted a teacher led professional development, using data from and about our school, around implicit bias, equity and/or race. As a result, teachers will demonstrate their increased knowledge of, and response to, how these elements impact instruction, assessments , classroom management and discipline through the development of Culturally responsive classroom environment; as evidenced by their lessons, unit plans, inter visitation logs and Advance observations. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Revise and further the NMSSJ Independent reading protocol for ELA and Social Studies Department ELA and Social Studies department Frequent observation with timely feedback with a particular focus indicators that are connected to rigorous instruction , questioning and assessing students. Teaching Staff September 2018-October 2019 October 2018-June 2019 Review, revision and further implementation of DOK and sentence stems and questioning template. . Inter-visitations among staff with a particular focus on key indicators. Whole Staff October 2018-June 2019 Whole staff November 2017-June 2018 Administrative team and Social Studies and ELA department teachers. Administrative team Administrative team and teacher leaders. Whole Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.   x Create implicit Bias workshops for parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. New York City Writing Project. Grade team meetings 0  Equity team Curriculum Team Allocations will be continuously made for per session and/or per diem to ensure implementation of our plan Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. By December 2018 two observations per teacher 2. By November 2018 establish Equity team Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  professional development agendas  agendas and deliverable from PDs, Teacher Team meetings, equity team meetings, etc. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Nelson Mandela School for Social Justice continues to bring and use resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families , artists, and community-based organizations . The involvement of families in Restorative Circles has helped increased the participation of parents and guardians, and has positively impacted the school wide community. During the 2015-2016 school year students and staff at NMSSJ participated in the International Creative Time conference, presented at the Expanded Success Initiative Conversation on Race; hosted representatives from the national convention of the Coalition of Schools Educating Boys of Color (COSEBOC); and worked with students from Research and Service and Boys and Girls High School to create a community mural on the outside of the campus building. These activities have strengthened our connection and ties with the surrounding community. With the on boarding of new staff and new students, in conjunction with a review of our environment survey, internal student surveys, OORS data, etc. illuminates that there is still a great deal of work that needs to be accomplished. Strengths  Parent participation in restorative circles/parent meetings.  Restorative Deans and their relationship with parents and students.  Relationship with exalt elevates expectations of personal success for youth ages 15-19 who’ve been involved in the criminal justice system  Developing relationship with College Now and LIU Early Scholars Program Priority areas  Consistent and effective outreach to parents.  Development of stronger relationship with local community based organizations  Establishment of a effective NMSSJ website. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 80% of NMSSJ guardians/parents and families will attend at least two community events sponsored by the NMSSJ the NMSSJ school community. As a result, parents/guardians support for and collaboration 2  with the school will increased as evidenced by a 15% increase of parent participation on the school Environment Survey with positive and supportive responses. . 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent Coordinator and administrator will develop and maintain a bimonthly Saturdays With the Principal to allow parents to speak with Administration, SPED Coordinator, etc. NMSSJ will develop and launch a school based academic symposiums that will allow community stakeholders and parents an opportunity to come and hear about student work, what they have learned, etc. Whole school Whole school NMSSJ will develop and launch parent cohort meetings, parent centered college and career meetings, Cultural celebrations Whole School PTA and/or individual parents will help to define, plan and launch learning opportunities for students and/or parents Whole school NOVEMBER 2018-June 2018 Parent Coordinator and Administration December 2018-May 2019 Administration, operations manager and Content Leads DECEMBER 2018-June 2018 Parent coordinator, Administration and student group All Staff OCTOBER 2017-June 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable.  PTA  EPIC Schools  NYCWP Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Budget PTA PTA funds Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 4  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 NMSSJ would have scheduled at least three events that parents are invited to with at least 40% attendance to each event. By March Nelson Mandela would have scheduled at least student lead conferences and/or symposiums, with at least 50% of NMSSJ attending at least one of the events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. .Parent Attendance and sign in sheets. Parent participation in development and implementation of events Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) item Analysis for June and August 2018 regents,level testing, credit accumulation, NYCDOE on track for graduation tracker, Scaled diagnostics, performance on EOYPerformance Task assessments t Aleks Diagnostics, credit accumulation, performance on regents,NYCDOE on track for graduation tracker, Scaled diagnostics, performance on regents Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Saturday Academy Small Group PM Class Cohort Meetings When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, before and after school Parent Cohort meetings Regents Prep PM Class Saturday Academy Cohort meetings Parent cohort meetings Small Group During the school day, before and after school Science EOYPerformance Task assessments Item Analysis for June and August 2018 regents. credit accumulation, performance on regents,NYCDOE on track for graduation tracker, Scaled diagnostics, performance on Regents Prep Small Group PM Class Saturday Academy Cohort meetings Parent cohort meetings During the school day, before and after school 6  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) regents and performance on EOYPerformance Task assessments Item Analysis for June and August 2018 regents.credit accumulation, performance on regents,NYCDOE on track for graduation tracker, Scaled diagnostics, performance on regents and performance on EOYPerformance Task assessments IEPreview, Guidance Counselor planning and leading Cohort meetings. Guidance Counselor develop plan and time line to seek out appeals for students; where appropriate During the school day, before and after school Regents Prep Small Group PM Class Saturday Academy Cohort meetings Parent cohort meetings Therapeutic counseling, goal setting, work on SEL attainments, Rites Of Passage Program Small Group, one on one counseling During the school day, before and after school 7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. By using our budget NMSSJ will be provide uniforms and other NMSSJ based clothing to our STH twenty-five Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). X 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 8  XN/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. did not receive specific funding 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Work closely with NYC Men Teach to recruit staff Institutions of Higher Education Engage with teacher preparation programs to identify candidates that align with NMSSJ philosophy, pedagogy and practice that include CRE, RJ, ROP, and SEL.. Have teachers participate in AP For All, Algebra For All and District wide Professional Learning opportunities Give priority to teachers who EOY rating is Effective and Highly Effective Work with teacher to achieve : lead teacher. collaborative teacher, etc. certification. Have teachers participate in the NYC DOE LEAP Program Mentor Training Provide mentors for new staff as they develop proficiency in the NMSSJ school model. New Teacher Summer PD Develop and deliver Summer Institute in key areas of practice for effectively supporting young men and women of color. 0  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Training for teachers would be structured in small professional learning communities. Small teams of teachers will focus on the following (among other things), led by highly effective staff and school leadership: Culturally Responsive Curriculum aligned to CCSS Professional Development around Project Based instruction Gender-focused youth development supports/rites of passage experiences NMSSJ will be working with AP For All, Algebra For All and BFSC to provide teachers with professional development around developing effective unit plans, lesson plans and performance task. NMSSj will also be working with the Mastery Collaborative and designing professional development/learning around mastery grading, actionable feedback cycles, etc. Community Associates will participate in the professional development/learning opportunities when they map back to the work they are responsible for. In addition, Community Associates will also participate in PDs around Cultural Relevance, Social Justice and Social Emotional learning/development. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/A 1  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers participate in content specific and grade level teams, Principal's cabinet, equity team, etc. . UFT Chapter Professional Development team actively make suggestions around the professional development staff identify as necessary. Lead teachers will form a PD team that will guide professional development opportunities for the school. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 2  advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 3   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Nelson Mandela School for Social Justice, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Nelson Mandela School for Social Justice will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 5  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 6  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Nelson Mandela School for Social Justice School-Parent Compact (SPC) Nelson Mandela School for Social Justice, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 7  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 8  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 9  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 0  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 16 School Name Nelson AMndela School For Social Justice Borough Brooklyn School Number 765 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Tabari Z Bomani Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher N/A Teacher/Subject Area Melissa Oliver Teacher/Subject Area Royce Denis Related-Service Provider Aomi Castro Superintendent type here Assistant Principal N/A Coach N/A School Counselor Andrew Martir Parent N/A Parent Coordinator N/A Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 215 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 4 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.86% 2  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Paste response to questions here: 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Paste response to question here: 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 3  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Paste response to question here: 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Paste response to questions here: b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Paste response to questions here: 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Paste response here: 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Paste response to question here: 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Paste response to questions here: 4  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Paste response to question here: 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Paste response to question here: 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Paste response to question here: 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Paste response to question here: 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Paste response to question here: 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Paste response to question here: 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Paste response to question here: 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Paste response to question here: 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Paste response to question here: 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Paste response to question here: 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Paste response to question here: 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Paste response to question here: 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 5  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Paste response to question here: Paste response to question here: 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Paste response to question here: Paste response to question here: Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Paste response to question here: 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Paste response here: Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, TABARI BOMANI, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 9  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 0  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 1 
