 75K771 School Name: P.S. K771 Principal: DENISE D'ANNA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P771K 307500013771 K-12 School Number (DBN): 75K771 1075 Oceanview Ave. Brooklyn, NY 11235 718-891-3600 Phone Number: 718-769-1700 Fax: Dr. Denise D’Anna ddanna@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 75 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Dr. Denise D’Anna Jonathan Belkin Philipe Sanchez Juliann Martin N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Ketler Louissaint Superintendent: 400 First Ave., NY, NY klouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1502 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Brooklyn South Beverly Ffolkes-Bryant FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 400 1st Ave. NY, NY 10010 bbryant@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1667 Phone Number: 212-802-1527 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dr. Denise D’Anna Jonathan Belkin Phillipe Sanchez Anna Desiderio Vinnette Ferrandino Yezell Moody *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Staff/Chairperson Assistant Principal/CSA Staff/UFT   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) PhillipeSanchez TariqSaif Jose Fuentes Jennifer Corno Tiffany Camacho Parent/ PA President Parent/Treasurer Parent/ Secretary Parent Parent Staff Member/FSC Field Support Liaison Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of our school is to provide each member of our diverse student population with the skills to develop to their maximum potential. We work collaboratively to meet the needs of each of our students and support them in acquiring the social, emotional and academic skills to become independent, successful adults. We use a cooperative, multi-sensory approach involving age-appropriate, individualized instruction to create a therapeutic environment   where all students are known and supported by the adults in our organization and feel comfortable taking risks to increase their levels of achievement. Philosophy We believe that schools should strive for excellence, shared decision-making and on-going collaboration through a a nurturing environment, rigorous instruction, on-going professional development and community outreach thereby enabling all to grow in their own right. Theory of Action If we plan strategically to involve all stakeholders in the education of our students and ensure best practices for educators and parents through on going professional developments, workshops, and further build decision-making opportunities then, we can can tailor instruction to meet the individual needs of our students and community resulting in data-driven results and independence. 2018-2019 School Wide Focus Our school focus for the 2018-19 school year is to engage families and support all families as active stakeholders and participants in the education of their children through on-going workshops, school events, and shared decision making. Instructional Focus Students will meet or exceed individual goals in mathematics through the planning and implementation of Specially Designed Instruction in alignment to Individualized Education Plans and learning modalities in the area of Measurement & Data through real-world application and problem solving with on-going formative assessment and collaborative planning resulting in meaningfully differentiated lessons tailored to students specific academic needs. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school is a District 75 school located in 8 sites throughout Brooklyn. We serve students with a variety of disabilities including autism, emotional disturbance, multiple handicaps and intellectual disabilities. In order to achieve our mission we must: ● Ensure rigorous instruction is evident to Improve student achievement in all academic areas through data-based targeted instruction ● Continue to have collaborative teachers through structured Learning Communities and provide staff with appropriate and comprehensive professional development ● Maintain an effective system of positive behavior supports ● Further build strong family-community ties through engaging parents as partners in the educational process 0  ● Use professional learning communities to ensure shared decision-making ● Develop positive self-esteem and social growth in the entire school community Our teachers participate in professional learning communities which use an inquiry-based model and Reading/Writing/Math continuum to to analyze student work, address the individual needs of students, and plan collaboratively to ensure classroom instruction targets student needs. These are practices that have been in place in previous school years, and in 2017-2018 we focused on the development and use of appropriate assessment to ensure student growth is tracked daily and accurately. Representatives from each learning community collaborated to develop and refine unit-based rubrics, checklists, and self assessments. From this work we are seeing an increase in rigor and clear expectations. An increase in student self-assessment was also evident through ADVANCE observations during classroom instruction. During the the upcoming school year, we will continue these practices and refinement of rubrics and checklists.  Embedded in our instruction are the Principles of UDL, as we targeted Principle 1, “multiple means of representation,” specifically perception, and Principle 2, “providing options for expression,” in our Units of Study. By addressing our classroom designs, we also focused on Principle 3, "providing multiple means of engagement," to ensure students can move towards independence and therefore increase self-regulation throughout their classroom and school community. In the upcoming school year, we will continue our focus on principle 3 to increase access. Through our continued refinement of our P771k units of study, we will ensure that the tasks students choose from are relevant to real-world experiences and offer an opportunity for authentic and preferred modes of communication. ● We continue to successfully implement monthly workshops for families to ensure they are equal partners in helping students achieve their highest ability and potential. Continuing the practice that was developed in 2017, workshops were held at 5 of our sites each time to make participation in the workshop convenient for all families. We also offered parents an opportunity to visit their child's classroom each month. We have also offered Cook Shop for Families workshops to encourage parents to consider healthy meal choices, support parents with budgeting, and aid in transitioning students to well-balanced diets. The impact of our parent outreach was an overall increase in parent attendance at Workshops, School Events, and Parent Teacher Conferences by a 25% increase in parent attendance.  During the 2017-2018 we have implemented School Messenger as a mass calling system to contact parents in regards to attendance and school events. We strongly believe that this attributes to the increase in parent attendance.  We utilize PBIS and Power of Choice with all students and illustrate behavioral growth in their classrooms.  During the 2017-18 school year there were 8 new teachers hired and 100% of new teachers received an MOTP rating of Effective through active mentoring, professional developments, and teacher support documented on Teacher Contact Logs by administrators. .  P771K utilizes JARS with the 12:1:4 staffing ratio. Our students are taught to develop independence in multiple content areas and adaptive daily living (ADL) skills. Our 12:1:4 teachers have collaborated with Physical Therapists during the 2017-18 school year to pilot a math and movement program. Although students have shown an increase in skills (numeration, counting), our next step is to move towards application across content areas.  We consistently utilize a Google Drive Community so teachers can share materials, school documents and communicate across sites. This is a resource for all teachers as they can find important information easily as they get acclimated to our school's routines and culture and is a significant resource for new teachers to aid in expectations for instruction.  We have implemented an after-school program in which our students utilize enrichment programs like Failure  Free Reading, and ST Math to engage with STEM subjects and demonstrate deeper cross-curricular knowledge. In 2017-18, 84.20% of teachers were Effective and in Domain 1: Planning and Preparation as evidenced by Advance data, as teachers demonstrated an improved ability to take ownership over adaptation of unit plans through use of school-wide protocols and strategies for planning. 1   In 2017-18 87% of teachers were rated Effective and Highly Effective in Questioning and Discussion as evidenced by Advance data, as teachers are engaging students in discussion through preferred method of communication, devices, and building student to student discourse in alignment to our focus in increasing communication. This is a 2% improvement from the 2016-17 school year.  During the 2017-18 school year, implemented College Access for All Middle School Program to ensure college and career readiness and to support students with future educational and professional choices in alignment to their vocational assessments. Students will have the opportunity to visit colleges and explore different college options through this program. This practice will continue during the 2018-19 school year as students and families have provided positive feedback.  During the 2017-18 school year we have had an increase in movement to Least Restrictive Environments as 14% of students have had a change in setting, decrease in related service mandates, and removal of paraprofessional. Challenges: ● All Math programs available for alternate assessment students through Core Curriculum funds require additional supplementation and adaptation, since the programs and skills-set do not align to the specific needs of our special education populations. Additional funding can support us in formulating after-school teacher teams to address curricular modifications and adaptations. ● Through use of Goalbook, DLM Essential Elements, and UDL strategies for curriculum development and continued use of a school-wide system of protocols and strategies to support teachers in adapting their units and lessons, we hope to see an increase in Student Engagement as evidenced by ADVANCE data. Currently, 92% of teachers were rated Effective or Highly Effective in this area. This is an 8% increase from the 2016-17 school year. ● Literacy programs available for alternate assessment students through Core Curriculum funds do not typically address a full, balanced literacy approach with high expectations for all students. Additional funding can support us in formulating after-school teacher teams to address curricular modifications which include improvement of school-based current units through creating of shared reading and interactive writing programs. Additionally, Fundations and SMiLE will be utilized to improve phonics instruction. ● Due to the fact that District 75 schools are not mandated to utilize the Parent Engagement hours and staff voted against it, we do not have afternoon hours available to parents to engage them in their child's learning process. Parents who work may not be able to attend daytime events. We could benefit form extra funds to support evening activities and events for parents. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P771K serves students with disabilities. Our respective student population include students with classifications of autism, emotionally disturbed, speech and language impairment, other health impairments, learning disabilities, and multiple disabilities. Class ratios include 6:1:1, 8:1:1, 12:1:1, 12:1:4, and inclusion. P771k serves students who are administered Alternate Assessment and Standardized Assessment. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school has made significant strides in all components of the Framework for Great Schools with a focus on Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, and Supportive Environment. In 2017-18 we placed a great deal of emphasis on continuing to improve Supportive Environment by improving overall staff morale through unifying all sites by creating a school-wide trip to the Museum of Natural History where students and staff of all settings were able to attend. Through this initiative and unifying trip, all student populations had an instructional focus and purposeful/planned activities. Staff members took on various assignments throughout the museum and worked as a team to support students. We also maintained and further developed our school Google Drive in an effort to connect sites and share best practices. In alignment to supporting school staff and improving school culture we included team 2  building and empathy sessions during our professional development days for building relationships between all members of the school community including teachers, paraprofessionals, and related service providers from multiple sites. During the 2017-18 school year we opened our doors to parents and invited parents to visit classrooms. We also increased the number of school events and workshops through Cook Shop and monthly workshops in an effort to support parents. The impact of this work to date has been an overall increase in parent attendance from the 2015-16 school year to the 2017-18 school year by 25%. In 2017-18, our efforts to improve Rigorous Instruction consisted of utilizing Math, Reading, and Writing Continuums when analyzing student work in addition to attached rubrics. It also consisted of implementing phonics based programs such as Wilson and Fundations and SMiLE in multiple classrooms. Teachers of Alternate Assessment continue to provide feedback regarding our Units of Study and we are consistently revising and adding to the curriculum in alignment to Common Core Standards to ensure rigorous instruction and high expectations. We also include interdisciplinary connections through our Units of Study as well as real-world examples and skills. By implementing a checklist for skills and standards, teachers to are setting higher expectations for students. To support teachers with rigorous instruction we have also created and implemented an intervisitation form with a focus for teachers to use for non-evaluative classroom visits to observe and discuss best practices. Evident from our efforts was a 14% increase in Reading, 12% increase in writing, 16% increase in Math and 12% increase in Communication. In the 2018-19 school year, we will continue our math focus but improve our work by refining our supplemental units of study to include more opportunity for real-world applications of concepts. We will utilize Goalbook as a planning resource for UDL strategies and begin to explore Essential Elements of the Common Core Standards by using Dynamic Learning Maps. We will work to improve in the focus area of Measurement and Data through real-world application and interdisciplinary approaches. Just as we have utilized the Reading and Writing continuum to measure student progress and define next steps, we continue to use a Math Continuum for learning communities to utilize as a lens for analyzing student work and designing rigorous next steps for students. In alignment the Framework for Great Schools in the areas, of Strong Family-Community Ties and Collaborative Teachers, teachers take leadership roles taking part in Dr. D'Anna's Diplomats (PLOT Team facilitators' meeting), Curriculum team/Inquiry team composed of the teachers across multiple sites, Administrative Internships with Assistant Principals, and conducting peer intervisitations with feedback. To support professional development, modules are planned in alignment to areas of noted improvement based on Advance trends. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75K771 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) 443 SIG Recipient (Y/N) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Drama # Music # Dance # CTE N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 83.0% % Attendance Rate 81.7% % Reduced Lunch 16.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 23.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 24.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 86.9% 1.1% 100.0% 35.2% 15.6% 1.1% 8 6% 9.4 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We focus on providing Rigorous Instruction through Specially Designed Instruction. While our students in self contained standardized classrooms showed gains in reading comprehension and decoding, 82% of students are reading below grade level, as evidenced by the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP) assessment. The majority of these students are reading more than 1 grade level below. When classroom teachers were asked to identify the cause of this reading deficit, they referenced Scantron data and Running Records to show that students are decoding at lower levels, which directly affects their ability to read fluently and thus, comprehend grade level complex texts. In order to increase the rigor of instruction when using Common Core Aligned curricula, it is important to ensure students have a strong foundation to grasp the more difficult material. Strengths  We have used Expeditionary Learning since the inception of Common Core and our staff has a deep   understanding of the standards and curricula they are using. We are also using Ready Gen to support ELA instruction in our K-2 standardized class to support comprehension skills. In the 2017-18 school year, we continued our use of Wilson to target our struggling readers across grades 5-8. All students who participated demonstrated gains of 1 or more modules. In 2017-2018 we continued to implement structured planning protocols which utilized Scantron data to scaffold student learning and track student growth on targeted objectives. We will continue this in the upcoming school year.  To address the needs of comprehension, phonemic awareness, and decoding, we have worked with teachers on implementing Shared Reading through our Units of Study by revising skills and including comprehension, concepts of print and decoding strategies.  Through our Individualized Instruction period for alternate students we are targeting specific skills and tracking student progress. Needs We require continued and widened use of structured phonics program for all standardized students who demonstrate a need as evidenced by TCRWP and Scantron. We will continue to implement WIlson for students who are determined to require it. K-2 classroom teachers will incorporate phonics on a daily basis, using elements of Fundations and our P771K balanced literacy curriculum to ensure that students have a solid foundation to meet the rigorous requirements of the common core as they move into upper grades. We will continue to utilize our Individualized Instruction period, in addition to their double block of ELA to ensure that students are receiving customized, tailored instruction. 5  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, to increase student achievement in reading comprehension, 95% of students in standardized, self-contained programs in grades K-8 will increase one letter grade in their reading level as evidenced by the TCRWP Running Record assessment through targeted instruction that focuses on comprehension and decoding . 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Through a needs of assessment and based on student areas of need (decoding and/or comprehension), we will supplement our ELA curriculum for K-2 students with elements of Fundations, a multi-sensory phonics program, used 5 days per week. Each day, 100% of our students in these classrooms will receive phonics instruction in addition , to the existing units of study literacy instruction. We will continue to utilize Expeditionary Learning and Ready-Gen. Through our SBO, we have chosen a block schedule for standardized ELA instruction and therefore have the time need to use both a traditional literacy program and to supplement with the aforementioned phonics and Specially Designed instruction in alignment to students IEPs. All students in Standardized Classrooms will take part in D.E.A.R. (Drop Everything And Read) time during their literacy blocks and/or first period of instruction to build reading stamina and fluency beginning with fifteen minutes of uninterrupted Independent Reading. We will continue to target our highest need students, indicated through state-wide assessment data, running records and Scantron, during our double block of ELA. These periods will also ensure that students have an opportunity to target the skills needed to master their IEP goals in both academic and social-emotional areas. Teachers will utilize Fundations, Wilson, and Guided Reading as two strategies to improve fluency and comprehension. Clusters will use non-fiction text to support instruction in other disciplines. In order to ensure, strong family and community ties, parents will be invited to monthly workshops during which we will focus on Academic skills and programs that can support students in the home. The impact of these workshops will be seen in higher levels of student achievement as the consistency between school to home is of utmost importance. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 9/18-6/19 Standardized students grades K-2 9/18-6/19 All standardized students Principal, Assistant Principals, standardized classroom and cluster teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, standardized classroom and cluster teachers 9/18-6/19 Classroom and cluster teachers Lowest scoring standardized students All students 9/18-6/19 Selected teachers, SLT members, Parent Coordinator Teachers will meet alongside their Assistant Principal and School Coach on a monthly basis to analyze student goals (selected from Scantron or Running record data and aligned to IEP). To ensure rigorous instruction in the classroom, teachers will work All standardized students 9/18-6/19 Classroom teachers and Assistant Principals 7 Standardized students 10/18-11/18 Classroom teachers, cluster teachers, Assistant Principals All Standardized students 9/5/18-10/31/18 Classroom teachers, Cluster Teachers, Assistant Principals with AP's and in learning communities to create new strategies when a student has not mastered a skill within the month. During the first marking period, standardized teachers will engage in ongoing professional development on how they can utilize data to plan guided reading groups that will target specific skill deficits. Teachers will apply what they learned when designing individual and group instruction during their ELA periods. By October 31, teachers will collaborate during learning community to complete an individualized student instruction plan in which they will select high-impact Scantron objectives, aligned to student IEP goals and grade level CCLS, and develop targeted strategies and groups to ensure they meet these goals. School leaders will meet with the team as a group and individually to ensure the plans are rigorous for each student. In addition, they will support in the organization of cross-classroom grouping so that the instruction can be customized and will not restricted by the classroom population or personnel availability in the classroom. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September, each parent will receive a Parent Handbook outline expectations for student success and ensuring that parents are aware of accessing the standards. To support Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core at home, parents will be invited to attend a workshop based on ELA instruction and Reading Strategies. Key personal responsible to present during workshops include a classroom teacher and parent coordinator. Parents will also be invited to visit their child's classroom so that they are aware of learning expectations and can become familiar with best practices during open-house designated times. To support parents with curriculum, parents will receive Curriculum letters at the start of each Alternate Assessment Unit. Parents will be notified of Assessment and student progress by classroom teachers so that they can work with students at home with specific strategies in alignment to student Individualized Education Programs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will replenish our materials for Expeditionary Learning, Wilson and Fundations and renewed our Scantron accounts. We will purchase Guided Reading libraries with high interest texts for our upper elementary and middle school students with teacher input. Teachers are provided with time in their schedules for collaborative planning and professional development from assistant principal(s) and from expert teachers. Teachers will take part in arranged inter-visitations to support best practices during designated periods. We will also renew our subscription with Goalbookapp.com in an effort to support Universal Design for Learning and IEP goal alignment to standards. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 8  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 45% of self-contained standardized students will demonstrate a growth of one or more letter grades as measured by the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project Running Record Assessment. As of February 2018, 61% of standardized students including self-contained and inclusion students have demonstrated growth of at least one letter grade in Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project Running Record Assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project Running Record Assessment Data will be tracked through AssessmentPro. Scantron Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Establishing a culture that values and supports communication has been a priority for students at P771K since 2013-14. In 2014-15, we introduced the Universal Design for Learning (UDL) Task Force, which resulted in an increase in authentic opportunities for communication and use of devices and saw a collective 13% increase over two years in communication. In 2015-16, we saw a 6% increase in SANDI Communication for alternate assessment students school-wide, a raw score increase from 125-145 and during the 2016-17 school year we increased 5%. To date, during the 2017-18 school year we have made strides in communication through programmatic and IEP driven devices. We have also focused on Danielson's Domain 3b and made an increase of 12% based on the SANDI assessment in the area of communication. Approximately 49.5% of our total student population in alternate assessment classes at P771K are considered non-verbal,defined as not being able to communicate basic needs or greetings without prompting. Classrooms utilize high-tech devices such as iPads, Quicktalkers and GoTalks to support communication for these students in the classroom. Of our non-verbal students, approximately 16% (30 students) utilize IEP-driven devices, all of which are considered high-tech. Communication is a high needs are of focus for our non-verbal students and a continued area of growth for our school. We will continue to utilize the strategies and programs we developed, i.e., , picture exchange communication systems, programmatic devices, low-tech books, and Individualized Instruction periods with a focus on Center Activities and/or Discrete Trial Training and Core Vocabulary. The observation data (lower scores in Questioning and Discussion with 87% of teachers rated Effective or Highly Effective, 13% Developing) and feedback we received from teachers continues to demonstrate that teachers require additional training and resources to fully support our struggling communicators. In order to provide a truly supportive environment, we must ensure that all students have a voice. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, to improve communication with a focus on Domain 3b within the classroom, all students in alternate assessment programs will demonstrate an effective and appropriate method of communication, as measured by a 3% increase in communication skills by the SANDI assessment. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will continue to consider assistive technology for students as documented on IEPs and as discussed at School Implementation Team meetings. We will continue to utilize assistive technology such as Go Talks, QuickTalkers, and iPads, as appropriate to provide students with options for communication to ensure rigorous instruction for all students. This will be evident through low-inference teacher observation notes and through increased use of language regarding devices in both the PLOP and student goals. During our Friday Professional Development time, Speech providers will have the opportunity to continue their training with classroom and cluster teachers on the proper use of augmentative alternative communication devices. Speech providers will also offer support by pushing into the class to ensure proper use of devices and support for classroom teachers. Administrators/APs will conduct professional development to further support questioning and discussion within classrooms. In an effort to ensure that devices are being utilized and distributed to all classrooms a needs assessment and on-going inventory will be effective and on-going throughout the 2018-19 school year. Feedback regarding devices will aid in redistribution and matching appropriate devices to student populations. Programmatic devices will be aligned to classroom need. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 9/18-6/19 All alternate assessment students Speech therapists, alternate assessment classroom teachers, assistant principals, coach 9/18-6/19 All alternate assessment staff and students Speech therapists, alternate assessment classroom teachers, assistant principals, coach 9/18-6/19 All alternate assessment students In addition to the collaborative effort mentioned above, we will support the consideration of Assistive Technology through professional development with the IEP Coordinator, Speech Providers and School Implementation Team. Alternate assessment staff and students 9/18-6/19 In order to engage families in the work of improving student communication, we will provide workshops for families on strategies for increasing discussion at home and individualized training for utilizing devices. To give parents access to the activities, goals and strategies of the classroom, we will utilize Class Dojo and School Messenger purchased during the 2017-18 school year, so communication can be a "two way street" and feedback can be provided frequently for all parents who elect to participate. Additionally, All families 9/18-6/19 All families 9/18-6/19 1 Assistant Principals, Speech Providers, and School implementation Team, Unit Coordinators Assistant Principals, SIT Team, IEP Coordinator, Speech Providers Principal, assistant principals, speech therapists parent coordinator, Assistant principals, classroom teachers we will continue to use communication notebooks to share this information as well. A workshop will be held in October to instruct families on the use of this program. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. To support families beyond school and to truly build the understanding of Supportive Environment, workshops will be offered in alignment to improving communication. Speech Providers, Classroom Teachers and/or Assistant Principals will present workshop(s) and materials needed for home including picture symbols. Parents will also be invited to visit their child's classroom and will have access to seeing the devices used for communication. Parents will be invited to make decisions regarding communication during their child's individualized Education Programs conferences. Key personnel responsible includes classroom teachers, service providers, Unit Coordinators, and speech providers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will continue to purchase iPads, assistive technology, and programmatic devices and will continue collaboration with Speech Providers and classroom teachers. We will also conduct a needs assessment in alignment to Learning Community Smart Plans and ensure that devices are in all alternate assessment classrooms. Speech providers will continue to support classroom teachers with low tech to high tech communication. Intervisitations among teachers will aid in viewing best practices with a focus on use of devices to support questioning and discussion. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will demonstrate a 2% growth in communication as evidenced by a mid-point assessment of Smart Plan data/individual instruction. As of February 2019, 46% of students identified for SMART PLANs for targeted instruction in the area of communication, have showed progress as per informal teacher observation and individualized instruction data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Communication Assessment based on student Individual Instruction data and Smart Plans. -Individualized Instruction Data Tracking Sheet created by learning community facilitators. -IEP Progress Reports/Annual Goals Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Through refinement of our P771K Units of Study and from our review of SANDI data beginning four years ago, the data led us to identify math a sa continued area of need for our alternate assessment students, as we were performing 10% lower in math than in the literacy sections of the assessment (2015). We leveraged the work we had done around literacy (data analysis and student work protocols, units of study) and applied it to math instruction. In 2016-17 we continued to focus on Operations and Algebraic Functions as an instructional goal Students made 13% gains in this area, however, only 11% has been noted in Measurement and Data. Therefore, during the 2017-18 school year, our Instructional Focus was Measurement and Data. This area of focus lends itself to an interdisciplinary approach, real world skills and application and activities of daily living. To date, there has been growth of 14% in Measurement and Data as measured by the FAST assessment during the 2017-18 school year. After reviewing with Learning Community Facilitators and discussing key findings during NYSAA implementation, teachers expressed concern in this area and surveyed teachers within their learning communities. This area will be a focus in our School based curriculum. We are continuing this area of focus during the 2018-19 school year as it aligns with our Unit of Study and students are still performing in this area than in Operations and Algebraic functioning by 2%. In the 2017-18 school year we have improved our math scores in SANDI by an overall 16% however we are still performing lower in mathematics than in reading and communication based on raw scores school-wide (there was a difference between the two content areas of 3000). We are seeking make further gains in both content areas. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in alternate assessment programs will show a 3% increase in Measurement & Data through collaboratively planned and revised Units focusing on Specially Designed Instruction, Individualized Instruction, and an interdisciplinary approach as evidenced by FAST assessment. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Math Units of Study are aligned to our ELA Units of Study to develop a cross-curricular and focus on students making real world connections. Students will continue to make connections between the two core subject areas in order to increase engagement and allow the students to have a deeper and more rigorous understanding of content The units of study have been in place since 2015-16 and are continuously revised to ensure real-world connections, interdisciplinary approaches, instructional shifts and increasing rigor. Units are supplemented with Goalbookapp.com, EQUALS materials, and Attainment when applicable. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Alternate students grades K-8 2018-19 school year Key alternate assessment K-8 Classroom staff, Inquiry/Curriculum Team, Assistant Principals, Principal Each month lead teachers will meet before school to edit and revise the upcoming month's Math Unit based on the qualitative and quantitative data collected during learning community and Learning Community Facilitator meetings (Dr. D'Anna's Diplomats). Alternate students grades K-8 In our middle school, teachers will utilize Project Based Learning, as was done in previous years, and align the activities with the math units to deepen student understanding of the concepts and help them make connections to real world experiences and support them in transitioning to high school and careers. Alternate students grades 6-8 9/18-6/19 Lead teachers from each site, Assistant Principals 9/18-6/19 Classroom and cluster teachers at our site at I.S. 14, Assistant Principal Learning communities will work alongside the school-based coach and assistant principals to develop SMART plans where a specific goal is selected based on SANDI data on Measurement and Data for the 2018-19 school year. This plan will be re-visited monthly for revision and teachers will be encouraged to develop new strategies to help struggling students master the selected goal. We will continue to utilize the Math Continuum designed by the South Wales Department of Education and utilize as a tool for determining what students can do and what the progression of skills is for each student. Use of the continuum will be evident in Unit Rubrics and teacher checklists to support the skill. Assistant principals will ensure that during the first marking period, all teachers receive an informal walk through and/or observation during a math period with a focus on coherent instruction, questioning/discussion, and rigor in planning and implementation. 9/18-6/19 Targeted Alternate Assessment Students Classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, Assistant Principals, Principal, Lead Teachers/Facilitators All classroom teachers 9/18-6/19 Classroom teachers, Assistant Principals, Principal All Alternate assessment students 9/18-11/30/19 Classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, Assistant Principals, Principal 5 Assistant Principals will create and implement a Math based professional development in alignment to key findings and areas of improvement based on observations. Assistant Principals will also begin to assign and track intervisitations among teachers to ensure best practices in the area of mathematics, All Alternate Assessment Teachers 11/30/18-6/19 Classroom teachers, Assistant Principals Our curriculum development team and parent coordinator will devise a minimum of two workshops to support the reinforcement of math skills in the home, just as we have done and continue to do with literacy and communication skills. CookShop for Families workshops (offered throughout the 2018-19 school year) will also focus on application of measurement in a real world context. These workshops will provide resources and tools that families can utilize in the home to ensure students are mastering math skills through every day activities. Parents will continue to be invited to open-houses/classroom visits to ensure parents are knowledgeable of best practices. Additionally we will continue to use communication notebooks, School Messenger, Parent Newsletters, and Individualized phone outreach to share this information as well. A workshop will be held in October to instruct families on the use of this program. All families 9/18-3/19 Principal, Parent Coordinator, teachers All families 9/18-6/19 Classroom and cluster teachers, parent coordinator, Assistant Principals, Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to encourage family support and their understanding of Collaborative teachers we will begin the school year with the focus of the Capacity Framework in mind. To establish collaboration and trust we will begin the school year inviting parents to our Open School Meeting to meet with teachers and begin the collaboration process. In order to support children at home, on-going communication is vital and will commence beginning the first day of school. Strategies include logging parent phone calls, utilizing communication notebooks, School Messenger, Class DoJo, and monthly parent workshops/open houses scheduled on a monthly basis in alignment to supporting students academically, socially, and emotionally. Monthly workshops will commence in September and continue through June as overseen be Assistant Principals and Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will utilize our Inquiry Team Per Session funds on a weekly basis to support curriculum planning and purchase additional manipulatives as needed. Within the curriculum planning time, the team will develop a parent letter to inform parents of upcoming units and strategies at home. We will refine and revise units of study by utilizing Goalbookapp.com, Digital Learning Maps, Common Core Learning Standards and Essential Elements, and real-world problems. Schedule adjustments include implementing math periods prior to lunch to ensure focus and addressing Math related goals during Individual Instruction. Teaching staff will also take part in inter-visitations arranged during the school day to support best practices and sharing of strategies. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 6  C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. SMART plan goals will be selected based on trends analyzed from 2017-18 SANDI data and Fall 2018 SANDI assessments. Each Learning Community will analyze item level data from the Measurement and Data strand to choose the skill they will focus on. This will be reviewed on a monthly basis and utilize the growth in SANDI from September-June to determine the success. Our mid-point benchmark will be based on SMART plan success, as measured by an average increase of 1.5% by February. As of February 2019, 48% of students have been identified as making progress towards their Learning Community SMART Plan goal based Measurement and Data selected from SANDI as per informal teacher observation and individualized instruction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SANDI/FAST Math Assessment Smart Plan data Individual Assessment Assessment Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Embedded in our leadership and communicated through high expectations through the delivery of instruction and by supporting socio-emotional learning for all students, we strive to move students to the Least Restrictive Environment. As a District 75 school, moving students to a less restrictive environment (LRE) is a high priority and can be a measure of a school's ability to develop independence and self-regulation skills in students. These are qualities students require for College and Career and align with the work we have done as part of our goal for the School Implementation Team (SIT). Each year we continue to surpass our goal in LRE. In 2016-17, we met and exceeded our goal of 4.3% as we exceeded 5.8% of students moving to Least Restrictive across all sites. During the 2016-17 school year by June, 5.8% of students went to Least Restrictive Settings (not inclusive and eight 1:1 paraprofessionals were terminated due to progress and student independence. We surpassed our goal of 3% of movement to the Least Restrictive Environment during the 2017-18 school year, as 14% of students moved to Least Restrictive Environments. P771K has demonstrated a steady increase in LRE placement and in order to continue to grow in this area and ensure that each student reaches their highest potential, we need to look at the individual needs and progress of all students and continue making team-based decisions to support student success. To further support this initiative we have conducted numerous tours for School Psychologists to better understand our programs and to benefit the needs of students when considering placement. Pupil Personnel Committee meetings along with Monthly SIT team meetings are vital to ensure that we are meeting and discussion students who can benefit and progress as independently as possible. This goal was chosen as it aligns with our vision and mission statement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students will demonstrate increased independence in the classroom as evidenced by a 4% increase in Least Restrictive Environment placement defined by movement to a less restrictive classroom ratio, decrease in related services, and/or removal of IEP paraprofessional. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration will revise and review an LRE section of the handbook that outlines the considerations and requirements for moving students to LRE with all teaching staff. Administration will review PPC meeting forms with Unit Coordinator to ensure proper steps are taken with all team members of the IEP. All P771K students and families 9/18-6/19 Assistant Principals PPC meeting forms will be distributed to classroom teachers and maintained by Unit Coordinators for any student who is going to LRE. Parent will also be a part of the PPC meeting/team to determine best placement. Classroom teachers, Unit Coordinator 9/18-6/19 Classroom teachers, Assistant Principals, Unit Coordinator Inclusion teachers, counselors, and teachers of middle school students will be further develop our transition program to ensure that students and families are able to plan for college and career from an early age. Their responsibilities will include supporting with vocational assessments for all eligible students, providing professional development to classroom teachers to support successful transition, implementation of an inclusion checklist and supporting job training and community outreach programs for all eligible students. We will continue to implement our College Access program. Teachers will engage in a team meeting during professional development hours on a monthly basis to ensure goals and planning for individual students are cohesive and consistent throughout a students educational career Assistant Principals will provide professional development on the first day of school and on a continuing basis to both whole groups of teachers as well as lead teachers to ensure P771K has a common understanding of how and why to move students to LRE. Assistant Principals will document students moving towards LRE on their monthly checklists due to Principal. All P771K students 9/18-6/19 Inclusion teachers All P771K students 9/18-6/19 All classroom teachers, cluster teachers, related service providers, paraprofessionals All P771K students 9/18-6/19 Assistant Principals, All teaching staff, Monthly School Implementation Team meetings will take place with Unit Coordinators in order to ensure discussion of School-wide goal, appropriate placement and availability at other sites. All P771K Students 9/18-6/19 Unit Coordinators, Assistant Principals, Principal Our transition team will extend to include families in transition planning and completion of the vocational assessment for all students to whom this applies. Teachers will support all middle school families in planning for college and career to ensure a Families, middle school teachers, 9/18-6/19 Unit Coordinators, Assistant Principals, Principal, IEP 9 seamless transition for 771K students. We will reach out to community organizations to ensure completion of CDOS hours and continue using P771K@PS329 as a worksite. transition liaison Coordinator, Transition Liasion 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to support family engagement in alignment and understanding of Effective School Leadership, parents will be part of the Pupil Personnel Committee and invited to take part in the decision-making process as a vital stakeholder for his/her child. In order for parents to be knowledgeable about programs offered, each parent will receive a parent handbook in the beginning of the school year and on-going support from a parent coordinator and Unit Coordinator. Parents are also invited to attend school workshops and events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our LRE team that will support the structures stated above will be consist of the School Implementation Team and Unit Coordinators and IEP coordinator in order to support the structures stated above. The team will meet monthly. We will continue to work with the CO-OP program, TOP Program, Summer Youth and Project Boost(if granted) to support student employment and community outreach programs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Utilizing data from SESIS and ATS we have created a tracking form that is updated monthly at each site. Our midpoint goal would be to move 2% of students to a less restrictive environment, defined as a move to a less restrictive staffing ratio, decrease in related services and/or removal of crisis paraprofessional. As of February 2019, 1% of students have moved to an LRE classroom setting and 3% of students have been identified for possibly deferred placement for LRE. 16% of students have been identified for Least Intensive Services as per reduction in related services, change in mandates, and moving from individual services to group services. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SESIS-Recommended Service Pages PPC Meeting Documentation LRE Report created with SESIS, ATS IEP Annual Review Tracking Sheets compiled by Pupil Personnel Secretary and Assistant Principal across sites 0  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Parental involvement and student achievement are highly correlated. Parental Involvement is a priority of our organization. As our staff voted not to have the parent involvement time on Mondays and Tuesdays, we would like to set the continued and increased involvement of parents as an on-going school wide goal Each year we conduct a survey to develop a list of workshop topics to benefit our students and parents. On a monthly basis we invite parents to workshops that are held at each site on the same day so that parents may attend a site that is more convenient to them. Workshop topics include parent input, student need, and our curriculum goals to further support parents with instruction and expectations. To increase parent attendance, we open our doors to parents prior to the workshop for open-house. As one of our community partners we have developed a relationship with NY Food Bank and will implement the Cook Shop program for the third year in a row. Our Parent Coordinator will hold Cookshop for Families workshops in alignment to the lessons taking place in the classroom. We also host eight Cook Shop for Families workshops and any additional workshops that related service providers may suggest including Speech and Physical Therapy needs. 48% of parents attended Workshops and School events. For the 2017-18 school year, there has been an increase of 6% in parent attendance at Parent Teacher Conferences. There has been an attendance increase of 25% at parent workshops which is an additional 115 parents in attendance across all school events. Parents do report that at times it can be difficult to come to meetings and events during the school day, when many are working. As we do not have the opportunity to utilize the Parent Involvement hours that our general education counterparts have, we must prioritize parent involvement and think of additional ways to engage parents. We would like to see an increase in the attendance of parents at all school-wide events including Parent/Teacher Conferences, Parent Orientation, Best Practice Fair, Dance Festival and Parent Workshops/Open Houses. . We will use parent attendance records at all events to track our progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through the offering and increase of multiple parent/guardian workshops, school events, including those with community partners, there will be a 3% increase in overall parent/guardian attendance due to increased school outreach as evidenced by parent/guardian attendance forms. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We purchased School Messenger during the 2017-18 school year and will continue utilizing this system as a means of communication. All P771K stakeholders 9/18-6/19 Assistant Principals We will utilize funding from Project BOOST (Senator Savino's Office)to provide incentives to parents to attend events (ex: raffles, gift cards) A parent survey will be issued to support workshop choices as well as to ask about convenient days and times for parents. We will support our SLT parent members in creating an e-mail list to support the sharing of information to parents. Parents receive notes in student book bags but many already utilize e-mail to communicate with teachers. School Messenger will also be utilized. Our transition team will support parents in setting goals for students and supporting the completion of the Vocational Assessment Parents will be informed of CDOS hours and implementation at off-sites through phone calls, letters, and meetings with classroom teachers. To support parental involvement, we will continue to send home Units of Study parent letters co-created by teachers representing their learning community with strategies for instruction and home school connection. We will continue to edit, revise, and distribute our Parent Handbook and Student Handbook to ensure that our mission/vision and protocols are easily accessible to parents and students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All parents 9/18-6/19 Assistant Principal All P771K parents 9/18 Parent Coordinator Unit Coordinators 9/18-11/18 Assistant Principals Unit Coordinators 9/18-6/19 Principal, Assistant Principals SLT parents and School-Based coach Inclusion Team, Parents of students 12 and over Curriculum/Inquiry Team 9/18-6/19 All parents of 771K students 9/18 Principal,Assistant Principals, Learning Community Facilitators Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 3  Community Based Organizations and Partnerships include: Project Boost Cook Shop for Families through NY Food Bank Coney Island Beautification Community Engagement for CDOS/Vocational include: Pajamas for Patients, NY Cares, Access VR, Summer Youth, and COOP-Tech Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Project Boost will support the purchasing of parent incentives Cook Shop for families provides parents with small gifts for attendance including cutting boards, water bottles, etc. Teacher-created resources such as letters and communication books School Messenger Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 we will have an combined total average of 8 parents attending monthly school workshops and events as evidenced by parent attendance records. As of February 2019 we have averaged 56 parents attending monthly school workshops over the course of 5 months by offering workshops across sites and have had an increase in 16.6% more parents in attendance for workshops from the 2017-18 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Attendance Records Parent Sign in Sheet Parent Attendance Data Tracking (graph) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) One on one, small group instruction One on one, small group instruction One on one, small group instruction One on one, small group instruction small group instruction During the school day During the school day During the school day During the school day During the school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NY State test scores test prep Mathematics NY State test scores test prep Science NY State test scores test prep Social Studies NY State test scores test prep At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) students experiencing social/emotional delays emotional literacy/PBIS 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Currently there are 11 students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 6  Under the McKinney Vento act we will provide transportation so that students may remain at P771K if families are in agreement or will reach out to placement for appropriate settings. We will provide free meals to Students in Temporary Housing as well as school supplies. We will also minimize any out of pocket expenses for extra curricular activities (prom, etc) by collaborating with our Parent's Association to ensure that students have the option to attend. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. For the 2018-19 School Year we received $16, 778 in the Title I STH Funds. 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 8  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 9  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 771K, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS771K will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 1  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers and attend school events ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P771K, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 3  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 4  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; ● Giving access to classrooms for open-house visits prior to workshops ● Maintaining means of communication through phone, email, communication notebooks and messenger system I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 5  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education and attend meetings with teachers/school personnel ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 6  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 7  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 1 1 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The P771K after school Title III Federally Funded Program will be implemented to improve language skills and academic achievement of English Language Learners (ELLs) while aligning to Common Core Learning Standards and Bilingual Progressions 1-5.11. Reading Standards for Literature. Make connections between self, text, and the world around them (text, media, social interaction). 1-5.7. Writing Standards. Participate in shared research and writing projects (e.g., explore a number of books by a favorite author and express opinions about them). 1-5.1. Speaking and Listening Standards. Participate in collaborative conversations with diverse partners about grade 1-3 topics and texts with peers and adults in small and larger groups. 6 ELLs will be attending the after school instructional English as a New Language (ENL) sessions twice a week for 31 weeks, on Tuesdays and Thursdays, from 2:51pm to 4:21pm (90 min.) during the months of October 2018 through June 2019. Students will be grouped according to their grade level from grades 3 to 5, within the the IEP mandated service as 6:1:1, based on the 2018 NYSELAT results, these students are at the Entering and Emerging levels of the English language proficiency. Each of the after school sessions will have "Raz-kids" (ELL Edition/Raz Plus) and "Headsprout" leveled lessons and activities for which we are planning to contuinue to use mini iPads purchased during the 2017-18 school year and a subscription for one year from www. Learning A-Z.com, ELL Edition/Raz Plus and Headsprout (Educational Software, Object Code 199). The differentiated instruction for grade levels from 3 to 5 ( Reading Levels from A to R) and learning disabilities will be addressed through www.Learning A-Z.com/Raz-kids based on the current scientific evidence-based literacy research and best practices pertaining to the students ethnic background needs, such as cultural awareness and native language support. Each month new Raz-Plus ready-to-use book collections from www.LearningA-Z.com will be presented targeting the top reading strategies and comprehension skills: October: Connect to Prior Knowledge November: Compare and Contrast December: Cause and Effect January: Sequence Events February: Story Elements March: Problem and Solution April: Reality and Fantasy May: Author's Purpose June: Revise, Confirm Predictions, and Summarize 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct educational instruction for ELLs will be provided by the ENL teacher with the support of one bilingual paraprofessional. The Title III program will also have a supervisor on the premises at all times remunerated from another source. All ELLs placed in this program will receive instruction in English using ENL strategies, such as a sheltered language approach, total physical response, graphic organizers and scaffolding techniques. The differentiated instruction, adapted materials with Mayer Johnson symbols, and the use of augmentative communication devices will be aligned with students’ IEP goals. Topics will be aligned with the units of study being implemented during the school day. The curriculum presented during the school day will be reinforced at the Title III after school program. Multisensory and multicultural ENL materials will be infused throughout all aspects of instruction during the school day and after school sessions. The classroom library will also be used to give the students a variety of books of all levels that reflect the cultural background, needs and strength, and languages of ELLs. The technology tools will be used as an aid to the instruction, reinforcement and assessment of the target language with the help of digital interactions. Multimedia presentations will be used to create an interactive element to the storytelling. The texts in English and Native languages (Spanish, Cantonese, Urdu, and Russian) will be provided along with the supplementary materials for digital storytelling. Educational instruction will be planned for ELLs taking into consideration their special learning disabilities and physical impairments. We are knowledgeable about our individual students' learning modalities and needs and find that our students benefit most when materials are presented in a variety of ways (multiple entry points). We will provide supports and supplemental materials including Raz-kids, the Unique Learning System, Starfall and AWARD Reading to enable ELLs to extend their language skills, construct meaning and interact with text hands on (using Ipads), We plan to access texts that align to students’ cultures and native languages. In addition, the augmentative communication and recording devices, audio/visual equipment will be utilized to meet our students’ individual learning styles and intelligences in a variety of ways. Assessment will be ongoing, performance-based and generative; aligned with state standards. It will be used to assess students’ progress through all four modalities of language acquisition: speaking, listening, reading, and writing. As an on-going assessment technique, teachers will use rubrics and students’ work that are consistent to the Title III instructional program, language acquisition stages, cultural backgrounds and particular needs of ELLs with disabilities. The scores on students’ Brigance Assessment of Basic Language and Learning Skills and NYSAA will also be another form to determine the impact of the Title III program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: 0  Part C: Professional Development P771K school’s professional development program for the staff participants involved in the Title III program will be utilized to significantly increase the ability of the staff to provide instruction targeted to the deficit skills of each ELL using differentiated instruction and ENL strategies. It will be aligned with the "Learning A-Z" Raz-Kids instructional after school sessions for ELLs and will focus on top reading strategies and comprehension skills for the staff involved in the after school program. One bilingual paraprofessional, one ENL teacher will meet twice a week for a book study, "Making Content Comprehensible for English Learners: The SIOP Model" by Jana Echevarria, Maryellen Vogt and Deborah J. Short. Professional development workshops will commence after each instructional session on Tuesdays and Thursdays for 30 minutes from 4:22pm to 4:52pm for 31 weeks from October 2018 through June 2019. An administrator will also be in attendance and in the building to supervise but will be paid through Middle School Afterschool Funding. The first PD session will be scheduled prior to the commencement of the the TIII program. Additionally, Professional Development will also be provided on a bi-weekly basis during Friday Professional Development periods (2:10-2:50pm) to support instruction of ENL learners and to increase staff knowledge of the Title III Supplemental Program. This portion of the Professional Development will be during regular school time to train Title III staff and other staff members working with ENL students. The staff will be using the "Learning A-Z" ("Raz-Kids") online based resources for educators. During each session an ENL teacher will introduce a new topic of study with the emphasis on ENL strategies to be used with -ELLs: October: Connect to Prior Knowledge November: Compare and Contrast December: Cause and Effect January: Sequence Events February: Story Elements March: Problem and Solution April: Reality and Fantasy May: Author's Purpose June: Revise, Confirm Predictions, and Summarize Questions will be distributed a week prior to each session, so that the staff will come prepared for discussion. Literature and materials will be provided for all attendees. Multimedia presentations and interactive activities will be presented during the workshop. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our school is an essential part of the community to many of the students and their families. All parents of ELLs at P771K will be given the opportunity to be actively involved in their child’s learning during after school hours under Title III program. Parents will be invited to attend the 1  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities after-school "LearningA-Z" instructional sessions on how they can assist in improving the English language skills and academic achievement of ELLs at home and in school. Our after school parental engagement activities will take place twice a week for 31 weeks, on Tuesdays and Thursdays, from 2:51pm to 4:21pm (90 min), during the months of October 2018 through June 2019. Parents will be encouraged to attend the ENL after school program and work alongside their children in active language learning process using computer and i-PAD activities. When home, they will engage their children and connect their technology skills to the educational outcomes, in addition to reading books, telling stories, and taking their children to museums and libraries. The activities will be based on the popular “Raz-Kids” book collections from www.LearningA-Z.com in English and Native languages. Multi-language resources will be available through the websites www.raz-kids.com, www.LearningA-Z.com and www.benchmarkeducation.com. One bilingual ENL teacher and a paraprofessional will assist with translations and interpretations in their languages. For other additional languages, the translation and interpretation funds will be used if needed. Topics will be sensitively selected and materials will be adapted for the needs of culturally diverse ELL students ' families at P771K. The following topics from www.LearningA-Z" will be covered during parental engagement activities: October-November: Connect to Prior Knowledge and Family Background December-January: Identify Areas of Weakness and Address with Correlated Resources from www.LearningA-Z.com February-March: Model Skills and Strategies Critical for Success April-May: Cultural Awareness and Native Language Resources June: Summarize To familiarize parents with the program, schedule and instructional goals, informational letters in native languages will be sent to each home. A series of phone calls will be made once a month to keep parents informed about monthly program goals and activities for their review, discussion and recommendations. Translation funds will be used for the purpose of transcribing written materials and providing oral interpretations. Title III funds will be used for materials, supplies, postage, and refreshments for the parents. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 11,827.12  Per session  Per diem Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. DIRECT INSTRUCTION: 1 teacher for 90 min. after school direct instruction 2 times weekly x 31 weeks 1 x1/5h x 2 x 31 x $60.65= $5,640.45 2  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 1 paraprofessional for 90 min. after school direct instruction 2 times weekly x 31 weeks 1x 1.5hx2 x 31 x $34.73 = 3,229.89 PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT: 1 teacher for 30 min. after school professional development 2 times weekly x 31 weeks 60.65 x 31`= $1,880.15 1 paraprofessional for 30 min. after school professional development 2 times weekly x 31 weeks 34.73 x 31 = $1,076.63 *Administrator will be paid through MSAS funds for duration of the program. Purchased services  High quality staff _____ _____ and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) $459.90 Travel ____ 1 Year Renewal of Learning A-Z Subscription for ELL Edition/RAZ PLUS on LearningA-Z.com $259.95 1 Year Renewal of Headsprout on LearningA-Z.com $199.95 ____ 3 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Refreshments for Parents: 78.98 12,366.00 Other TOTAL 78.98 12,366.00 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name P771K Borough Brooklyn School Number 771 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Denise D'Anna Coach - ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Gisele Lukmanova Teacher/Subject Area Marina Acumen, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Svetlana Cipriano, ENL Related-Service Provider - Superintendent - Assistant Principal Vinnette Ferrandino Coach - School Counselor - Parent Philipe Sanchez Parent Coordinator Denise Ramos Field Support Center Staff Member - Other (Name and Title) - C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 431 5 Total number of ELLs 86 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 19.95%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The main assessment tools used to assess the early literacy skills and guide instructional planning for our ELLs with disabilities are the SANDI, FAST Scantron Performance Series, and Running Records. Adaptive Reading (FAST) provides data on ELLs' five instructional targets: Concepts of Print, Phonological Awareness, Phonics, Vocabulary, and Comprehension. The Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI) is used to asses students in alternate assessment. Teachers also collect additional data with task specific rubrics in the areas of communication, social skills and behavior in order to differentiate instruction and measure student progress. All data is reviewed to identify priority target skills, instructional strategies and materials are developed to address the identified skills. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Structures in place include ENL teachers taking part on monthly curriculum meetings with representatives from all learning communities to share strategies/support for ENL learners. To further support this effort, ENL and classroom teachers 6  collaborate for assessment and SANDI goals are infused into the P771K Units of Study along with standards based instruction to address Concepts of Print, Phonological Awareness, Phonics, Vocabulary, and Comprehension. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? ELLs are evaluated with assessments such as SANDI, NYSAA, and teacher-designed pre/post assessments that align with Units of Study that are sensitive to the particular needs of ELLs and used to assess students’ progress through all four modes of communication: speaking, listening, reading, and writing. Assessments are ongoing, performance-based, and generative that provide an integrated account of all that ELLs are learning, both in language and in academic content areas. Assessment techniques include a pre- and post- teacher made tests adapted to the students; development of rubrics to assess student work. Essential to understanding growth across all student populations is the review of teacher assessments, supervisor observations, and review of progress towards Individualized Education Plans (IEP) goals. Related service reports also measure growth with individual students in targeted areas. Furthermore, all students have portfolios composed of student work samples and content area teacher assessments that are reflective of progress. After reviewing data, following suggestions from the Quality Review and consulting with teachers, related service providers and parents, instruction is targeted towards increasing independence and students’ funds of knowledge in personal and community domains. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data has been gathered, structures in place include collaborating with parents and teaching staff to ensure flexible grouping, alternate placement paraprofessionals (if determined appropriate) and Integrated Content Instruction. Students also receive direct/targeted instruction during Individualized Instruction periods to address specific student need. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] For ELLs who score below specified levels of performance on the annual English language proficiency assessments, our school provides additional support with rigorous, culturally responsive instruction. The following programs are offered within the Response to Intervention (RTI) framework: Wilson/Foundations highly structured remedial program that teaches the structure of language to students who may require multi-sensory instruction; SMILE step-by-step multi-sensory program; Individual Instruction period(s) that are goal-specific for individual students with paraprofessional supports, AIS period(s) with a focus on reading comprehension, vocabulary, writing proficiency and performance on high stakes tests. These services are delivered in a one to one tutoring setting during the school day. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In the beginning of the 2018-2019 school year, all new entrants were administered the NYSITELL to determine eligibility for ENL services. In the spring of 2018, each ELL was administered the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) to determine English proficiency. This test determines the level of language proficiency (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding) and whether or not the student continues to be eligible for ENL services. After reviewing and analyzing the NYSESLAT assessment data from Spring 2018, the following patterns are found across proficiency levels. Reading/writing and listening/speaking test scores revealed that three students excelled at the Commanding level, two students scored at the Expanding level, two students progressed to the Transitioning level and twenty students have moved to the Emerging level. All other ENL learners scored at the entering level. Across all grade levels, students show some progress in all four modalities, but with higher scores in listening/speaking skills comparing to the test scores in reading/writing. We also have a number of ELLs who were tested, but were unable to answer due to their multiple disabilities. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 7  In order to disseminate these findings, ENL teachers meet with administration who then turn-key the information during cabinet, Unit Coordinator and PLOT Team/Learning Community Facilitator Meetings. ENL teachers are also invited to attend Learning Community meetings with classroom/content area teachers addressing specific student populations to discuss adjustments to programs, such as individualized instruction periods, that are reflected in ELLs IEPs. Data is disseminated to classroom teachers who are supported in analyzing the data in regards to student need by assistant principals and data specialist. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ENL classes are provided by three ENL (K-12) teachers who are dually certified in common branch/special education and TESOL, through a combination of integrated and stand alone models of instruction. The stand alone ENL instruction is provided to develop English language skills that are aligned with the ENL/ELA standards. During integrated model of instruction, ENL teachers continue to collaborate with the certified content area teachers to make their lessons more meaningful through the use of ENL strategies and vocabulary support. ENL students are grouped homogeneously, according to their grade level within three consecutive grade levels, English language proficiency, as Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding, IEP mandated service as: 12:1:1, 12:1:4, 8:1:1, 6:1:1 and Inclusion. b. TBE program. If applicable. 771K does not currently feature TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. 771K does not currently feature DL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All integrated and standalone ENL classes in our school offer home language support. Moreover, 33 (thirty three) students in Alternate Placement with the IEP recommendation for Bilingual services are supported by alternate placement paraprofessionals who speak their Home language and English, and to further support the students each of the students receive ENL services from licensed ENL teachers in a Stand alone/Integrated program. a. Our Entering and Emerging level ELLs from grades K to 8 receive 2 units (360 min.) of ENL instruction for 1 unit (180 min.) of Standalone ENL and 1 unit (180 min.) of Integrated ENL per week. Our Transitioning students receive 0.5 units (90 min.) of Integrated ENL/ELA instruction and 0.5 units (90 min.) of Standalone ENL. The Expanding level students receive 1unit (180min.) of Integrated ENL/ELA/Other Content Area minutes of instruction per week as required by CR Part 154. Commanding Level ELLs continue to receive 0.5 units (90 min.) of study per week of Integrated ENL in ELA/Other Content Area/Other Approved Services for an additional 2 years after passing the NYSESLAT. Our staff ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to students' proficiency levels in alignment with school schedule and curricular. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 8  For all ELLs content area is provided as follows: all subjects are taught in English through ENL methodologies by certified Special Education teachers who have completed the mandated 10 hours of Jose P. training. The instructional materials used in our classrooms are both age and grade appropriate: Benchmark content area leveled books, Rigby (On Our Way to English), National Geographic Theme Sets, P771K Units of Study, teacher-made and differentiated materials, such as adapted books, graphic organizers, picture symbols, as well as augmentative devices, such as dynavox, Big Mac, and switches. Content Area Instruction follows the Common Core Learning Standards. To ensure that students meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards and pass the required state and local assessments, ENL instruction follows the Common Core Learning Standards and incorporates ENL strategies such as: Language Experience, Whole Language, Scaffolding Techniques, graphic organizers, and Cooperative Learning. The use of technology and augmentative communication devices are incorporated to give students additional instructional support. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our three ENL teachers along with the bilingual pedagogues administer Spanish LAB testing during the initial ELL identification process, followed by numerous evaluations and surveys in child's home languages done by our school and/or District 75 bilingual psychologists throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status ENL and Content Area Instruction is differentiated according to the specific needs of ELLs from different subgroups: a. At the present time, we have two (2) students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE). The SIFE identification process has been initiated and an appropriate placement was made with additional support from a buddy student, tutoring, AIS, and home language resources. b. Newcomers (0-3 years of service) represent a majority of ELLs at P771K, consisting of thirty four (34) students. Since the beginning of a school year, IEP's have been reviewed and related and support services have been provided. Currently, newcomers are supported through Title III After-school program, differentiated instruction, alternate placement paraprofessionals’ assistance in their home language, and a nurturing, print and language rich environment to facilitate language production. c. Those students who have been receiving ENL services for more than three (3) years, but less than six (6) years, are supported through AIS, Buddy System, peer tutoring, CHAMPS with the continuity of ENL services as per their IEPs. Students are encouraged to participate in Title III and all after school programs designed to improve test prep and literacy skills. d. Long term ELLs are supported through AIS, Instructional Technology, peer tutoring, Title III program, visual arts enrichment. e. ELLs who have achieved proficiency in English and exited from ELL status are provided with at least one half of one unit of study of English as a New Language (ENL) (90 minutes per week) for at least two years. They also receive transitional support through AIS, Title III, Project Art, multi-sensory and multicultural materials in home languages. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The integrated ENL instruction is built on P771k academic content area units of study and English language development using ENL strategies. In alternate assessment, teachers differentiate tasks within the units of study according to the individual students' needs, proficiency levels, educational backgrounds, content knowledge, and home language literacy skills. The differentiated approach at P771k is based on three levels of learning for ELL-SWDs with significant cognitive disabilities: Level 3 students typically have potential to learn to read text, and to independently demonstrate comprehension of learned information within modified content. Level 2 students require picture support and other direct support in learning and the demonstration of skills. Level 1 students require maximum support within instructional tasks. For these students, 9  increasing the level of participation is the main objective. In addition, through online educational websites, such as Tarheel Reader, Reading Works, Easy Learning, teachers of ELL-SWDs integrate technology into shared learning experiences and differentiated tasks that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. All ELLs receive instruction through a Sheltered English approach. The differentiated instruction, adapted materials with Mayer Johnson symbols, and use of augmentative communication devices are aligned with students’ IEP goals. Learning A-Z online program is also incorporated to ensure that all ELLs develop academic skills. In addition, the Starfall online program is used in the classroom and at home with Internet access to the animated stories and hundreds of interactive resources for homework and practice. Methods of instruction to deliver lessons include Language Experience Approach, CALLA, total physical response, graphic organizers and scaffolding techniques. The use of technology and augmentative communication devices such as Big Macs paired with Mayer-Johnson symbols, bilingual and monolingual software programs, and adapted switches are incorporated to give students in alternate assessment programs additional support. For standardized ELL-SWDs, teachers use the NYSED Expeditionary Learning Classroom materials and Core Knowledge Listening and Learning textbooks in ELA (HMH); Go Math packages of all levels in Math and Harcourt Science and Glencoe Science books and equipment in Science. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment, our school uses special methods of instruction, such as Language Experience Approach, CALLA, total physical response, graphic organizers and scaffolding techniques. The use of technology and augmentative communication devices, such as Big Macs paired with Mayer-Johnson symbols/PECs, bilingual and monolingual software programs, and adapted switches; assessment accommodations, such as granting of extra time, oral interviews, tasks requiring completion of graphic organizers, demonstrations or visual representations and other assessment tasks that depend heavily on proficiency in English, are incorporated to give students in alternate assessment programs additional support and flexibility. To ensure scheduling flexibility as per IEPs, ENL teachers work with classroom teachers and STARS coordinator to ensure appropriate ENL programming. Schedules are also adjusted based on teacher feedback to administration such as moving math periods to the morning and designing curriculum Units in both ELA and Math with a common focus to carry language throughout the two units. We also focus on students’ families, languages spoken at home, the use of home language books with adaptations, and other bilingual materials and resources, such as Fonolibros, EDL Leveled Libraries and Pequenita Celebraciones. The use of bilingual software and multimedia equipment enhances and supports the development of their home language skills. HLA literacy activities are extended throughout the curriculum and subject areas. Our ELL teachers along with the content area teachers work diligently with parents to assist their child with hands on activities related to their disabilities and English language deficiencies during the school day and Title III after school sessions. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We use an instructional program(s) to develop reading and writing skills through the integration of academic content based on best practices across all subject areas (Math, Science, and Social Studies) and grade levels. In ELA/ENL we use SMiLE, Fundations and Learning A-Z programs developed on current scientific evidence-based literacy research and best practices which meets the requirements of NCLB and ELLs for each stage of language development. In alignment to ESSA, all ELL students have access to all programs that are enhanced through on-going professional developments for teachers. These programs implement English Language skills development and content area instruction through the use of ENL methodologies to ensure that ELL students meet the standards and pass the required State assessments, NYSITELL, and/or NYSESLAT. Through our Leapfrog program, ELLs learn reading, math, and language arts through interactive, instructional content that is delivered on the Leap Pad and Quantum Pad personal learning tools. Through an "Everyday Math" intervention program, ELLs learn and practice essential skills in Math and apply problem-solving strategies in everyday life situations. The 0  Standardized Assessment ELLs use HMH Go Math packages of all levels in Math and Harcourt Science and Glencoe Science books and equipment in Science. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on data and trends, individualized instruction periods will remain in effect to target specific language development skills and SANDI related goals. Also, based on inquiry and discussion with classroom teachers, revisions will be made to P771K Units of Study to increase access to standards by addressing the Essential Elements of Common Core Standards. Based on trends in ENL and Communication, a needs assessment will be conducted to ensure that all classroom teachers have access to low tech to high tech devices to address speaking and listening standards. Fundations, Wilson, and SMILE will be implemented across classrooms. Improvements to data collection will be considered based on teacher input. Scheduling will continue to be adjusted based on teacher input and math periods will be assigned in the morning rather than afternoon when applicable. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Our school currently features ENL program only. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs and integrated curriculum activities, instructional technology and tutoring. ELLs and their parents are invited to participate in all Saturday, after-school and supplemental services, widely represented in all school community programs. Parents/guardians are encouraged to attend monthly PTA and family involvement activities where interpreters and written translations are provided as needed. Title III Saturday sessions are implemented to help ELLs attain English proficiency through online Learning A-Z lessons. Each lesson is planned to supplement the themes being studied during the school day. The curriculum presented during the school day is reinforced at the Title III program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Some of the ENL instructional materials used in our program are books on guided reading, shared reading, and silent reading, reading aloud; writing booklets, charts, graphic organizers, visual aids and technology. Text is also accessed online from such sources as Reading A-Z and Tarheel Reader. The use of computers, iPads, and smart board technology provides students with the opportunity to practice listening, writing, reading skills, and language development. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support for ELLs is delivered by multicultural library books, as well as books and software in the Spanish, Chinese, and Russian languages and the adaptation of literacy materials to meet the needs of students with severe disabilities. HLA literacy activities are extended throughout the curriculum and subject areas. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services support and resources correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. All curriculum and materials are age and grade appropriate. We use Benchmark content area leveled books, Rigby (On Our Way to English), Unique, National Geographic Theme sets, teacher made and differentiated materials to assist our ELLs in becoming successful in our school. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All P771K sites are co-located buildings where all staff takes an interest in the needs of our students. In order to benefit students in the areas of academic, linguistic, and socio-emotional needs, all sites are print-rich, students have access to grade level text, libraries, and a focus on Common Core Learning Standards. Inclusion works with ENL teachers within the general education classrooms. In order to ensure socio-emotional needs are being met, students are included within the general education population for school events including holiday celebrations (Ex. The Halloween Literacy Parade), parent teacher conferences and open school with co-located school. 1  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year, newly enrolled ELLs are offered Chapter 683 Summer School with ENL instruction provided by fully certified ENL teachers when available through Chapter 683 application system. They receive support in their home language from alternate bilingual placement paraprofessionals and related service providers throughout the school year. The parent coordinator assists them with home language resources and home-to-school connections. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We currently do not provide any language electives to ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Currently there are no dual language programs available. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Based on our inquiry team observations and findings across all subject areas and grade levels, the team members Principal, and Assistant Principals determine the deficit areas on instructional planning for the teachers of ELLs and select the appropriate topics pertaining to the professional development of all teachers of ELLs. Professional development to all teachers and administrators is specifically designed to addresses the needs of English language learners. During Professional Learning Communities (PLC), teachers collaboratively use data to create instructional goals unique to their ELL population. Teachers of Small Learning Communities using a PLC model have a common planning period and share the same small group of students, including ELLs, whom they closely monitor in order to offer an increasingly targeted responsiveness to individual needs of students. Teaching strategies also include activities and techniques to develop oral language and vocabulary, as well as reading and writing skills. Best practices in second language instruction are modeled, analyzed and implemented in the classroom setting. Classroom inter-visitations are arranged to share ideas and strategies. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 154.2 is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a New Language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours is dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Agendas are maintained by attending teachers, administrators, and Learning Community facilitators. The guidance counselors meet weekly to discuss strategies in order to assist ELLs as they transition from elementary to middle and/or middle to high school. Professional development sessions for staff are provided by a school administrators and Learning 2  Community Facilitators and guidance counselors on how each student’s unique background affects his or her instructional needs, and to meet that student with tailored secondary level or high school level instruction; how to teach the content and language together in the same classroom, through a co-teaching model in which the ELL and content teacher collaboratively plan. Self-reflective sharing sessions for staff are included for each stage of second language acquisition development and balanced literacy, such as "Language Support for English Language Learners of Each Stage of Language Learning", "Balanced Literacy for English Language Learners" to assist ELLs as they transition from one school level to another. During the 2017-2018 school year, teachers were provided with ongoing professional development in alignment to Balanced Literacy for Shared Reading Instruction and opportunities to build language with a focus on reading/writing/speaking. The D75 OELL provides training throughout the school year for ENL and bilingual teachers as well as non-ENL, non-bilingual teachers, administrator, and related service providers on topics including co-teaching, designing appropriate assessments, supporting ELLs through the visual and performing arts, introduction to ENL methodologies, Digital Stories, in addition to ELL compliance sessions. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents of ELLs are offered annual individual meetings to discuss the goals of the ENL program, their child’s language development progress and English language proficiency assessment results, as well as language development needs in all content areas. Individual meetings are conducted by our two fully certified ELL teachers in the first quarter of a school year in two different locations with the help of qualified interpreters/translators. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The parent coordinator at P771K provides parents of all students, including parents of ELLs, with an on-going communication and training in their home languages on different aspects of their children’s education such as, home activities to support learning, outside support in their local community, and family interest needs surveys. Parental involvement activities provided under Title III program, are based on the Reading A-Z online program, consisting of a series of training sessions for the parents on how to help their child at home to improve English language skills, for instance, what to do when reading to their child at home - before, during, or after reading the book. Parents are introduced to the popular classics from all over the world in English and home languages that are sensitively selected and adapted for the needs of culturally diverse ELL students and their parents at P771K. The special education topics, such as the identification and classification process, IEP development and placement of ELL students are also addressed in a series of discussion forums at the end of each session. In addition, our Dually Special Education certified ENL teachers and Content Area teachers provide special training for the parents to assist their child with hands on activities related to autism spectrum disorders and other disabilities. To familiarize ELL parents with the annual individual meetings, informational letters with agendas and goals of the program are sent out to each student’s parent. All informational materials are translated into home languages. To disseminate information and obtain parent input, a series of phone calls are established prior to each meeting, about program goals, needs and concerns for their review, discussion and recommendations. ELL parents’ attendance is recorded and stored in the school building using existing procedures and protocols. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. To further support ENL learners, P771K offers an after-school program that also supports parents in language acquisition and demonstrates techniques to work with students who are ELLs within our program. 3  4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Dr. Denise D'Anna, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P771K School DBN: 75K771 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dr. Denise D'Anna Title Principal Vinnette Ferrandino Assistant Principal Denise Ramos Parent Coordinator Gisele Lukmanova ENL/Bilingual Teacher - - - - - - - Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member - Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Philip Sanchez Marina Acumen/ENL Svetlana Cipriano/ENL - - - - - 1/1/01 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75K771 School Name: P771K Superintendent: Ketler Louissai The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Denise Ramos Parent Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Each parent meets with the school staff when their child is placed in our school. An intake form and Student Emergency Contact card are completed where the student’s home language is noted. The appropriate language service for students is determined at CSEs/SBST. However, if it has not been done at CSE, our school licensed and trained pedagogues determine the primary language spoken by the parent of each student upon enrollment based on the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) responses and face-to-face in-depth interviews with the parents and students in their home languages. If the primary language is not English, and the parent requires language assistance, the P771K Parent Coordinator arranges Interpretation services by in-house school staff or/and interpreters from the Translation and Interpretation Unit over-the-phone. The requests for written translations of documents are forwarded to the Translation and Interpretation Unit. The school coordinators maintain the appropriate and current record of the primary language of each parent based on the responses in Part III of the HLIS. The school secretaries make necessary ATS updates on language codes and parent's preferred languages 7  (RCPL, RADP, RHLA, RHSP Reports). During school orientation meetings parents have an opportunity to conduct surveys and ask questions with assistance from an oral interpreter from the P771K staff, or from the Translation and Interpretation Unit if necessary. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2 6 1 0 29 0 1 0 7 49 7 3 303 Albanian Arabic Bengali Cham Chinese Cantonese DARI/FARSI/PERSIAN Mandarin Russian Spanish Urdu Uzbek English 0.49 1.47 0.25 0 7.11 0 0.25 0 1.72 12.01 1.72 0.74 74.26 2 6 1 1 21 2 1 5 6 50 10 3 300 0.49 1.47 0.25 0.25 5.15 0.49 0.25 1.23 1.47 12.25 2.45 0.74 73.53 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Based on parents' preferred language SPANISH represents at least 10% of the population at P771K. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 8  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The documents translated into home languages and disseminated to the parents and school community are after school, Title III After school program information, school leadership letters, and newsletters. Translation funds are used for the purpose of transcribing written materials and providing oral translation. September/October Monthly Parent Workshop Invitations Monthly Individualized Education Programs Within 10 days of meeting Title III Parent Involvement On-going Translation of school letters will be provided in-house by school staff to ensure timely dissemination by school professionals fluent in the parents' home language when applicable. Translation of monthly parent workshop letters will be provided in-house by school staff to ensure timely dissemination by school professionals fluent in the parents' home language when applicable. Translations of Individual Educational Program documents will be done through the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Translation/interpretation funds will be used for parent Involvement in Title III. Translation of documents will also be contracted through an outside vendor if necessary. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Our school provides initial parent orientations, in-depth interviews during ELL identification process, Language Proficiency Team meetings, Individual Educational Program meetings, annual meetings with ELL parents, parent-teacher conferences. September - June provide interpretation service(s)? Interpretation services will be provided by in-house school staff or/and interpreters from the Translation and Interpretation Unit during all face-to-face meetings. Qualified interpretation services will be available during Individual 9  Face-to-face parent meetings and phone calls with teachers, guidance counselors, school psychologists, school nurses and/or other school staff regarding critical information about their child’s health and education are also facilitated throughout the school year. Individualized Education Program Meetings Annual Meetings per Student/Triennial meetings November Parent Teacher Conferences March - May - Educational Program meetings over-the-phone or in person upon request. In-house translation, the Translation and Interpretation Unit services, and parent's personal translators will be welcome to attend. In-house translation by school personnel, the Translation and Interpretation Unit services, and parent's personal translators will be welcome to attend. - 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, all families will be contacted in their home language as documented on student blue emergency cards and as per Home Language Surveys and ATS documentation. Translation will be provided by school personnel who are fluent in the same language as well as the office of The Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In order to ensure all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, Chancellor's regulations were reviewed at Staff Orientation on September 5, 2018. During the 2018-19 school year we will continue using School Messenger to mass call parents and as a system for communicating school events in addition to letters home. A Professional Development for Communicating with Parents session was held on September 5, 2017 involving use of technology (REMIND) for ensuring classroom communication. Staff is also informed of the resources of the Translation and Interpretation Unit and staff is aware of on-site translators available. Staff is to communicate with Unit Coordinators in order to identify available translators. Furthermore, along with the LPT Team, Unit Coordinators are responsible for communicating with families and identifying families that require translation. A current record of the primary language of each parent is reflected in ATS and on all school emergency cards. To further support staff, Professional Development will be scheduled during Friday Professional Development sessions to aid in communicating with all families and presented by Assistant Principals during the 2018-2019 school year. 0  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Multilingual welcome posters, translated signage and interpretation notices are posted throughout the school building that advise parents regarding their right to request translation services. Parents' Guide to Language Access and Language ID Guides are located in the main office, along with the information about their children's educational options. Letters, special education, and related services documents are backpacked with students at the beginning of school year and before IEP/Parent-Teacher Conferences. The letters requiring a signature are maintained in person. All of these letters are delivered to the students and families in their home language. All translated surveys, application forms, notifications, and informational documents, such as Parents Bill of Rights, are obtained through the DOE website in all necessary languages. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The P771K parent coordinator offers parents of all students, including parents of ELLs, the family interest needs surveys, so that our school can better serve the needs of our students and their families. Parents also fill out evaluation forms and surveys regarding their needs and concerns after each workshop or training provided by our ENL teachers and partnering Community Based Agencies. Parents’ needs and concerns are evaluated and considered for further improvement of our home to school cooperation and involvement during school inquiry team meetings. 1 
