 02M002 School Name: P.S. 002 MEYER LONDON Principal: SILVANA NG   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 2 Meyer London Elementary School 02M002 School Number (DBN): 310200010002 PK-5 122 Henry Street, New York, NY 10002 212-964-0350 Phone Number: 212-608-4080 Fax: Silvana Ng SNg2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 02 Email Address: Silvana Ng Allison Koster Betty Chee Silvana Ng Xia Lin N/A NA District Information Bonnie Laboy Superintendent: 333 7 th Avenue, Room 713, New York, NY 10001 Superintendent’s Office Address: blaboy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3739 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: 212-356-7514 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7 th Avenue, 8 th floor, New York, NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Silvana Ng Allison Koster Betty Chee Mary Ng N/A Karen Arneson Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Assistant principal Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Terence Sumner AnnaParuch MeiZhang Giovanni Classen Susan Leung Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our mission at PS 2 is to provide children with a rich, rigorous learning environment in which they are cognitively engaged with a wide variety of content and experiences. Students will be active, reflective and self-initiated learners. To further their learning, they will strategically utilize resources that are available to them. These resources include technology, peer collaboration and independent research.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 2 is located in an ethnically diverse neighborhood located on the border of Manhattan's Chinatown. Our school takes up almost the entire block, but it is our school yard that draws the attention of those that walk by. We can accommodate all of our students from pre-kindergarten through grade five at one time. The children enjoy the open space each school day: at arrival with their families, at recess by grade and even after school with their after school programs. Specialty subjects for students include science, physical education, visual arts, technology, and music. Partnerships with community-based programs brings to the school additional expertise and resources to enhance students' learning: National Dance Institute, Music and the Brain, Chess in the Schools, Cookshop, NYU Music Mentors, APEX for Youth, and Columbia STILe 2.0. National Dance Institute has more than a 20-year history at PS 2 ad continues to provide a dance program that is unrivaled. This is our third year of participation in the the Music and the Brain program. The program is aimed at our youngest music student and strives to develop their music learning as they learn to play the keyboard. This program is aligned to the music curriculum which includes learning to read music and play the recorder. The school chorus provides an additional opportunity for music students to develop their vocal skills. Our 3rd and 4th graders participate in Chess in the Schools in the classroom and more than 30 of them are part of the P.S. 2 Chess Club. The club enters Chess tournaments, consistently performing well and earning trophies and medals. Cookshop, the nutrition program sponsored by Food Bank of New York is not only a classroom program but also has a family workshop component that promotes healthy eating and nutrition at home as well as at school. P.S. 2 partners with N.Y. Cares for a variety of activities including New York Cares Day and Winter Wishes program. The school track team is up and running with early morning and recess practices and training. Academic support for our 1st graders is provided through the Reading Rescue Program. Academic support for our 4th graders is provided on Saturday mornings through a partnership with APEX for Youth. APEX also provides basketball training on Saturdays for our 4th and 5th graders. New York City Football Club provides a soccer program during school hours and after school hours. The curriculum and the enrichment opportunities results in integrated learning for students that positively impacts their academic progress. P.S. 2 is committed to all aspects of growth and development of the students. PS 2 is one of 114 schools across the United States to receive the sought-after Apple ConnectED grant. There are iPads for each of our students, prekindergarten through 5th grade. Apple also provided teacher resources for the classroom (macbooks and iPads, and Apple TV). In partnership with Apple, teachers are integrating technology into classroom learning. This technology enhances and extends the work that is started in our Computer Specialty subject. It further enhances students' learning by providing differentiated learning opportunities, learning tools and work products. Teachers and students will be utilizing and applying technology to enhance learning and to create digital work products. Students will continue to use apps such as keynote, iMovie, and pages as well as engaging with web contact to further their learning. This year, we will continue our partnership with Columbia University's STILE 2.0 program. The second cohort consisting of 5th grade teachers will work with the STILE team to create a content unit that integrates technology. P.S. 2 is committed to the learning of our English as a New Language (ENL) students. There are bilingual classes in grades kindergarten through 2nd grade. All our ELL support teachers are trained in Reading Rescue. This year, we will be piloting Reading Rescue's small group reading initiative in first grade. We also use ReadWorks to support students' content and vocabulary learning. Our Title 3 program target specific language skills - Readers Theatre support for reading and speaking and content studies to support reading and writing. For our parents who are adult ENL students, the school hosts an intensive English program that meets five days a week for 4 hours a day. The program is through the Department of Education Adult Education Program. It is well attended with at least 15 students committed to learning English In the 2018-2019 school year, PS 2 will continue to have the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP) provide professional development to increase rigor in teaching and to build coherence in the grade. The literacy curriculum will be aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and will provide for rigorous instruction. 0  There will be planning so that every student will have multiple entry points to be a successful reader and writer. Continuity across all classrooms will be evident. To enhance rigorous learning in math, our lower grades (kindergarten through third grade) will be transitioning to a different math curriculum, Pearson's Math Investigations. Teachers in grades 4 through 5 are continually seeking out and utilizing best math curricular units and practices to enhance our Math in Focus curriculum. The social emotional needs of our students and families are extremely important. This year, P.S. 2 is part of the Thrive NY Mental Health initiative and has the support of a Mental Health Consultant to provide resources and outreach for community services to meet the needs of our students and families. This will build upon the already established partnerships with local community health organizations such as Charles B. Wang Community Health Center, the Lower East Side Family Union and Gouveneur Health Services. Our guidance counselor and two social workers meet with students and families to support their emotional and mental health needs. Our Parent Coordinator is an integral part of the home-school connection in ensuring not only academic support but also social services support. The school is committed to ongoing communication and partnership with the parents through monthly Family Newsletters and Family Mornings. During the monthly Family Mornings, parents are invited into the classrooms to observe lessons and participate in a learning activity alongside their children. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P.S. 2 has a large enrollment of immigrant families, with the majority from China. As the children learn the English language, they become bilingual. To support students' language learning, we have bilingual classes for grades kindergarten through 2nd grade. Students are also supported by ESL teachers in their learning. We have Integrated Co Teaching ( ICT) classes on every grade where students are supported by the general education teacher and the special education teacher. There is close monitoring of students with Individual Educational Plans ( IEP)s so that their specific needs are met. We are a Title I school using our funds to support all our students. The staff continually seeks resources and develops partnerships to meet the needs of our students and families. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In the past year, PS 2 has worked hard in ensuring that rigorous instruction is evident in every classroom. We adopted the Teachers College Reading and Writing Workshop curriculum in Fall 2016. Students' level of writing and amount of writing has increased significantly. Teachers have been using writing assessment results to inform their instruction and to ensure that small group instruction is provided for all levels of writers. Students have been able to talk about their writing craft and structure decisions and strategies by utilizing checklists and rubrics. Across all the grades, students have been writing narrative and non-narrative in a variety of genres - small moments, fictional stories, procedural writing, research and opinion based writing, There is coherence within the grades and across the grades as to what and how students are writing. The additional support of technology, specifically through the use of individual student ipads have enable our reluctant and struggling writers to put their ideas to text through the use of voice to text keyboards. Moreover, their writing can now be in digital format through the use of the Book Creator and Pages apps. In Fall 2017, the school fully implemented the Teachers College reading units. Students were engaged in reading units to deeply understand character, use text support to identify main ideas and themes, and actively participate in book clubs. Teachers used read alouds to introduce student to engaging literature, model reading strategies and lift the level of conversations around books. Across all grades, students were reading independently and engaged in book partnerships. This year, we will continue to work with Teacher College staff developers to refine and strengthen our reading pedagogy to support all our learners. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M002 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 552 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 36 36 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 15 11 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 91.7% % Reduced Lunch 32.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 14.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.25 0% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 62.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 90% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 86 82 96.7% 4.7% 21.6% 5.3% 78.6% 0.4% 0 9% 6 72.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 2 conducted a comprehensive needs assessment related to instructional practices and student outcomes. Data analysis revealed the following in each category of the Framework for Great Schools Element of Rigorous Instruction: CCLS-Aligned Curriculum in All Subject Areas  Strengths: Teachers continue to strengthen and deepen their knowledge, planning, and delivery of CCLS-aligned curriculum. o Teachers meet once a week within grade level to plan lessons and units aligned to common core standards and responsive to students' learning needs. o Teachers are teaching the TCRWP units of study in writing and reading and using student assessment data to revise their teaching and units. o Teachers are planning math units by referencing the appropriate standards. o Teachers are working with TCRWP staff developers to deepen their literacy teaching strategies. o The 2017 Quality Review indicates that students are engaged and instruction is coherent across the grades.  Needs: PS 2's literacy curriculum needs to be further aligned with the CCLS to include the pedagogical shifts demanded by the standards. o This year teachers will be studying and closely monitoring students' independent reading through regular reading conferences and informal running records assessments. o The 2017 Quality Review identified assessment as an area of growth. The review indicated that PS 2 can improve in using assessment consistently to plan for small groups to address student needs. o The 2017 School Quality results indicate that there is a need to deepen the level of class discussion. High Standards Set in Every Classroom  Strengths: Teachers are using the TCRWP Writing Progression and Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Independent Reading Benchmarks to assess students and inform their literacy teaching. o Teachers are using the TCRWP Writing Progression to inform them of students' current writing abilities and set the goals for them to progress in their independent writing abilities. o Teachers are studying student writing (pre-assessment and post-assessment) for each writing unit. o Teachers are utilizing the writing progression to inform their instruction and possible skills to be addressed. 3  o Students are able to utilize unit checklist to evaluate their work and to set goals for their own o learning. ICT teachers are implementing station teaching to ensure that every student is able to access the grade content.  Needs: Although teachers are aligning instruction to CCLS and are using data to inform teaching, teachers need to receive additional training to understand foundational literacy and math skills to teach students who are significantly below level. o Teachers need to develop an understanding of the progression of literacy skills across several grade bands to improve Tier 1 intervention strategies in their classrooms. o Teachers need to improve their assessment of student learning, particularly in reading and in math. Students Intellectually Engaged and Developing Critical Thinking Skills  Strengths: Teachers have been regularly participating in professional development and utilizing new pedagogical strategies they have been learning. As a result, teachers are guiding students towards a higher level of critical and reflective thinking in their work. o Two Teachers College Reading and Writing Staff Developers worked with grade teams in three cycles of three days to understand and implement the reading and writing workshop units. As a result, students are consistently writing and able to discuss their writing strategies to craft a well structured and engaging writing piece. o Selected teachers in prek through 5th grade participated in intervisitations to other schools. o Teachers have been participating and turnkeying learning from Apple Professional Learning coach to incorporate technology in all content areas. As a result, students have incorporated technology as a resource and also a creative tool.  Needs: Teachers continue to need to develop a common understanding of rigor and how to incorporate and promote it in their lessons. o Teachers will implement the Teachers College Reading curriculum and under the guidance of administration and staff developers will learn and implement best practices to teach reading. Students will become critical readers who can infer about characters and themes. They will also be able to infer author's perspective whether it be in narrative or non-narrative reading. o Teachers will analyze their lessons and student work products for evidence of rigor and common core alignment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, in three out of four observations, 85% of teachers will receive Effective or Highly Effective ratings in Danielson components 1A (Demonstrating knowledge of content and pedagogy), 3B (Using questioning and discussion techniques), and 3C (Engaging students in learning), as measured by supervisor observations of teacher practice; looking at student work that results from the lessons observed; and reviewing teacher lesson plans. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher teams will collaboratively deepen the planning of the reading and writing units, with the Teacher's College staff developer, using their curriculum for reading and writing. They will also continue the content-area social studies units, planned using the New York State Social Studies Scope and Sequence. Students will be engaged in these units during a designated “interdisciplinary/inquiry” block. In order to provide rigorous instruction to all students, teacher teams will engage in professional learning related to the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP) CCLS-aligned units of study. Teachers will study the new units of study in reading, will participate in lab sites and inter-visitations with their colleagues to observe the implementation of skills and strategies in these units, and will engage in teacher rounds focused on developing a shared understanding of instructional rigor, as well as providing professional feedback to colleagues on the level of rigor observed in their classrooms. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom Teachers June 2018-May 2019 Principal Students Classroom Teachers Students September 2018-May 2019 Teacher Team Leaders External Consultant Teacher Teams Principal Teacher Development Coach Teacher Team Leaders Teacher Teams Principal ESL/Special Education Teachers All general education and cluster teachers Principal Principal Parent Coordinator Teacher Teams English as a Second Language (ESL) and Special Education teachers will design a cycle of professional learning to support colleagues with effective strategies for meeting the needs of English language learners (ELLs) and students with special needs. All Teachers ELL students and SWDs Monday PD, November-2018-January 2019 All Teacher Teams will write and translate regular curriculum family updates, which will build a shared understanding of the meaning of rigorous instruction, will explain how content-based units are addressing the CCLS, and will provide specific suggestions for supporting children at home. Students Parents and Guardians Students Once a month, September 2018-June 2019 To strengthen the home-school connection and to inform parents of their children's learning, they are invited into the Every month, Principal 5 classrooms to learn alongside their children, to celebrate the completion of culminating projects and to observe lessons. These family mornings encourages parents and guardians to become an integral part of their children's education. Parents and Guardians October 2018-May 2019 Parent Coordinator Teacher Teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will: 1. Host monthly parent engagement time in the classroom. During this time, parents will observe the lessons and then participate with their child in the follow-up independent work 2. Host ongoing workshops to inform parents about our curriculum in reading, writing and math 3. Host workshops regarding state testing and middle school admissions process Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  HUMAN RESOURCES: o Teachers College Reading and Writing Project staff developers will work with grade teams to support literacy teacher, particularly reading, in the classrooms. Staff developers will work with teachers in 3 cycles of 3 sessions throughout the year and one year end of planning day. o Teachers will attend TCRWP calendar days to deepen their understanding of the reading workshop model. o Teachers will attend specialty Department of Education sponsored workshops throughout the year that focuses on ELL , Special Education math, music and art learning. o Teacher intervisitations within a grade to align the curriculum and learning outcomes. Intervisitations will be focused on an area of investigation and teacher learning (e.g. questioning and discussion techniques, content understanding, small group work). o Teachers intervistions to other schools to observed, learn and discuss best practices  INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES: o Additional Teachers College units o Rich and diverse classroom libraries to encourage reading  SCHEDULE ADJUSTMENTS: o Additional meeting times when working with staff developer o Time provided for intervisitions and debriefing. o PD Monday sessions to turnkey and share new learning.  BUDGET: Adequate funding will be set aside for per diem substitute coverage, as well as per session for additional planning and meeting times. o Per diem coverage o Per session for planning Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A 6  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the mid-point of the school year, school leadership will analyze the trends in teacher ratings in Danielson components 1A, 3B, and 3C. At least 75% of teachers will have had two observations completed, in which they have received Effective or Highly Effective ratings in components 1A, 3B, and 3C. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Classroom observations of students, to listen in on their discussions and see the participation levels as evidence of their growth in being more verbal, types of questions, and interactions with classmates. Looking at student work will also evidence their growth in reading based on the TC reading progression. Analysis of the rate of reading growth based on students' progress in their independent reading levels will be evidence of student learning. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? P.S. 2 is committed to the social emotional learning of students and strives to provide a supportive environment in which all students can do their best learning.  Strengths: Parents and teachers feel that PS 2's is a safe and nurturing school. o The 2017-2018 NYC School Quality Guide indicates that that almost all the teachers believe that school is a safe place and that learning is important. o The 2017-2018 NYC School Quality Guide indicates that almost all parents agree that school staff work hard to build relationships with the parents. Moreover, parents feel respected by the school staff.  Needs: There is a need to develop and implement a curriculum for social emotional learning for all students through the grades. o The results of the 2017-2018 NYC School Quality Guide indicates that there is some teacher concern that there needs to be more teaching to support students in advocating for themselves. o The Guide also indicates that the adults believe that access to staff support to manage student escalation situations can be improved. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all PS 2 students and staff will participate in professional learning to teach social- emotional skills to students. Teachers will also participate in professional learning to better support students when they are exhibiting challenging behaviors. This goal will be measured by a 50% reduction in the number of students who are recidivists, as reflected in OORS. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Staff will be trained to incorporate social emotional learning lessons in their lessons. This will include mindfulness techniques. Teachers will participate in Department of Education professional learning workshops to increase their knowledge of strategies to teach students self regulation skills. Teachers will turnkey this information. The guidance counselor will collaborate with teachers to present lessons to improve students' self-advocacy skills, especially when confronted with challenging situations. All students September2018-June 2019 Principal All staff Teachers guidance counselor, representatives from grade teams Teachers Students January-June 2019 Principal Teachers Guidance Counselor Social Worker November 2018-June 2019 Guidance counselor Social worker All students will participate in: cooperative activities -- at recess and in the classroom. Teachers and recess staff will be trained to play cooperative games and handle students conflict resolution skills. All staff September 2018-June 2019 Principal All students Classroom Teachers School Aides In keeping with new Chancellor’s Regulation A-411, PS 2 will establish a crisis de-escalation team. This team will meet monthly to place students into behavior “tiers.” Students with Tier 3 behaviors will be assigned a staff “case manager” Crisis De-escalation Team Members September 2018-June 2019 Principal Special Education Coordinator 9 who will work intensively with these students, as well as with their family members. The Parent Coordinator in collaboration with the social worker will plan and implement at least two workshops to inform and support parents in developing their children's social emotional and self-regulation skills. Students with Tier 3 behaviors Parents and Guardians Parents and Guardians Crisis De-escalation Team Guidance Counselor October 2018- Principal April 2019 Parent Coordinator Social Worker 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. PS 2 will continue to facilitate and to enhance a support group for parents of IEP students. The group is led by the Social Worker and provides information and resources to support student learning, particularly behavior at home. 2. PS 2 will work with the PTA to provide resources for a supportive environment. 3. PS 2 will continue to provide teachers with professional learning such as TCIS (Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools), Responsive classroom. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  HUMAN RESOURCES: The Guidance Team and Crisis De-escalation Team will be critical to achieving this goal. They will report bimonthly to the Principal on their progress and on student needs during Cabinet meetings. INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES: Staff will continue to develop resources for for social emotional learning including mindfulness techniques.  o We will seek out professional learning opportunities (Responsive Classroom, Therapeutic Crisis Intervention) to increase staff understanding of teaching to meet students' social emotional needs.  SCHEDULE ADJUSTMENTS: Scheduling for teachers to attend professional learning, to plan for turnkeying and to meet to develop a coherent school curriculum.  BUDGET: Funding will be set aside to pay for teacher workshops to support social emotional learning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 0  At the midpoint of the school year, OORS data will be analyzed to identify the nature of behavior issues, as well as the rates of recidivism. We expect to see the number of recidivists dropping by 50%, as well as the number of Discipline Code incidents entered into OORS declining by 40% (as compared with the same point in the 2017-2018 school year). Recess incidents will be recorded by school aides at the end of each day. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will look at the number if incidents entered into OORS, and make note if the entries are from the same individuals, and locations from where the incidents are happening. Particular attention will focus on the data for recess incidents. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Teachers are provided with strategic opportunities for continuous growth.  All classroom teachers will work with TCRWP staff developers through the 2018-2019 school year.   Two cohorts of 4th and 5th grade teachers will participate in Teachers College STILE 2.0 project to plan with Specialty teachers will attend content-specific workshops throughout the year staff developers to plan and implement a technology integrated unit of study.  Administration will identify teachers to learn, grow and lead in specific content (e.g. math, ELL, etc.) These teachers will attend content specific professional learning meetings.  Grade leader meetings will be structured to study and develop coherence across the grades. Needs: According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Quality Guide, teachers indicated that in general professional development was coherent but did not always provide enough time to try and evaluate new learning.  Teachers need to have opportunities to learn new practices and content in depth and to be supported in their classroom implementation.  Teachers need to be have the opportunities to participate in intervisitations with other schools. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Within one year, all teachers will participate in at least 2 professional learning opportunities and turnkey their new learning within their grade team. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will meet in grade teams for 3-session cycles with Teachers College Staff developers to plan and teach writing lessons aligned to the CCLS. Teachers will implement at least 4 of the units of study in writing. Classroom teachers September 2018 to May 2019 Teachers will share classroom practice by hosting interclass visitations. Intervisitations will focus not only on the content but also on student rigor. Classroom teachers Teachers will meet cross-grade to build coherence across the grades. Classroom teachers October 2018 -May 2019 Oct. 2018-May 2019 Principal, TDEC coach, TC staff developers, grade leaders, Staff developers, universal literacy coach, principal Principal, TC staff developers, Universal Literacy Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school holds monthly "Family Morning" for parents to visit classrooms and observe lessons. Classroom visitations will also include visitations to cluster teacher rooms. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Human resources: Staff developers, will meet with each grade to plan, model and coach lessons. They will report to the principal and assistant principal during consultant work days. At least one administrator will be at each of the PD sessions. Instructional Resources: Staff will be provided with the new TCRWP units of study and books that support the units.  notes and plans will all be entered in the shared Google Docs folders  Books, and technology apps will be ordered to support the units  Per diem monies will be set aside to pay for subs on the PD days  Per session monies for more planning time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 3  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, teachers will have posted notes on google docs of new learning from professional learning meetings. By June 2019, all teachers will have participated in intervisitation of colleague's rooms to observe highly effective instruction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Google docs will be used as a file sharing method to share new learning between teachers and for collaboration within the grade. Agenda and notes from intervisitations will also be evidence of progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  Principal has an understanding of research-based literacy curricula that can be adapted to meet the needs of our ELLs and Special Education students.  Principal will meet with grade team leaders once a week to plan and implement strategies to achieve our schoolwide goals.  Through weekly notes, the principal conveys the instructional vision for student improvement, purpose and the instructional work that needs to be implemented. Needs:  There is a need to build capacity within the staff by encouraging and developing teacher leaders.  There is a need to ensure that new teacher learning is shared with other staff members. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. For the 2018-2019 school year, at lest 20% of the teachers will organize facilitate a staff or parent learning opportunity meeting or workshop. This will result in shared learning between teachers and also with parents. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal will provide opportunities for teacher leadership in leading cycles of professional learning on Mondays and other school staff development days. Teachers Principal will strategically provide professional learning opportunities to develop capacity in various content strands: literacy, math and technology. Principal will meet weekly with grade leaders to develop a set of coherent beliefs about teaching and learning. Parents will be informed of the work involved first at the SLT meeting and then through the family updates. Classroom teachers and support teachers Classroom teachers and support teachers SLT members, then teacher, to parents September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-2019 Principal, staff developers Principal, staff developers Principal, teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal and SLT members , PTA members 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to PTA and SLT meetings. Parent workshops, classroom visitations and celebrations of student work will be scheduled. Regular monthly parent newsletters will inform parents of current units of study. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration will schedule teachers to attend out of school workshops and visitations. Contract for Excellence money will pay for the TC staff developers Tax Levy FSG money will pay for subs to cover teacher attending PD at the school and at TC Tax Levy NYSTL money will pay for professional books as needed Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 6  X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Observations of teacher practice across classrooms especially in the area of Danielson 4e - professionalism. Teacher feedback about the PD and its effects on their teaching Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher observation ratings and feedback; student reading progress as measured by independent reading assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Welcoming Environment for Families  Strengths: Families report that the school is a warm, welcoming place. o The 2017-2018 School Quality Guide indicates that there is a strong home-school relationship and that is a positive one. There is a high level of trust between the parents and the school. o There is ongoing communication in the form of monthly grade newsletters and monthly invitations to visit the classrooms in the morning once a month. o The Parent Coordinator updates parents on a regular basis with monthly calendars, notices, Remind app and Wechat, a Chinese messaging app. The Parent Coordinator coordinates , escorts and translates for community events and workshops. o The PS 2 website keeps parents up to date with information and calendar of events.  Needs: PS 2 will continue to seek out community services to support families who are challenged with needs (financial, health, emotional and mental) that negatively impact their child's learning.  PS 2 will continue to provide learning opportunities for parents and guardians in addition to the current programs, Adult ESL and Family Cookshop. PS 2 Takes Advantage of Community Resources  Strengths: PS 2 develops long-standing partnerships with organizations that allow us to provide enriching experiences for our students that they look forward to year after year. o PS 2 has partnered with the National Dance Institute (NDI) since 1982 was featured on a PBS NewsHour segment about NDI. o PS 2 has partnered with Chess-in-the-Schools since 2006, providing chess instruction to our 3rd, 4th, and 5th graders since then. This year, 2nd and 3rd graders will be learning how to play chess. o APEX for Youth a Saturday test prep and basketball program for our 4th graders. o Music and the Brain has provided the keyboards, the curriculum and the resources to teach keyboarding to kindergarten students. o NYU Music Mentors provide free individual instrumental lessons to students after school. o NYU Dental Program has a full dental office in our school. o 2nd grade student will participate in swim classes at the local YMCA in spring 2019.  Needs: o PS 2 has a diverse offering of enrichment and in-house specialty subjects for our students. However, PS 2 is still seeking a program to partner with to promote students' social emotional learning. The Mental Health consultant will provide additional program resources for the school's work. o PS 2 will organize a learning fair to celebrate and share with parents. Other schools and guests will be invited to visit the fair. 8  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, PS 2 will invite parents into the school at least once a month to celebrate student learning as well as learning about the school's curriculum. At least one of these meetings will be focused on Special Education. Evidence of this goal will be measured by parent notices and parent sign-in sheets. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school social worker will plan and implement at least 3 parent workshops across the year to support parents in meeting their children's social emotional and educational needs. Parents and guardians Students and teachers, December 2018-June 2019 Parents and guardians PS 2 will partner with CookShop to support the first grade interdisciplinary unit on plants we can eat. Teachers will receive professional development in the CookShop model and will prepare healthy, plant-based recipes with their students throughout the year. This program will particularly address the needs of our English language learners and students with disabilities, as they will learn critical vocabulary, as well as engage in hands-on learning. October 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator Social Worker Principal Assistant Principal Classroom teachers An ESL teacher will also host at least six family workshops on cooking with children. At the start of the year, parents/guardians will be invited to the grade orientation days. Each grade will start with a presentation in the auditorium to discuss commonalities and expectations on the grade and then the families go up to their child's classroom. We will have semi monthly events to invite the families to: holiday performances, Lunar New Year, Social studies or Science Fair, Art show, NDI performance, Talent show Teachers, parents, students October 2018-June 2019 Principal, Parent coordinator, teachers 0  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Charles B. Wang Health Center Gouveneur Hospital APEX for Youth NY Cares NYU Dental Program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  HUMAN RESOURCES: Our Teacher Team leaders, and Parent Coordinator will be key to achieving this goal.   They will report weekly to the Principal on their progress during Cabinet meetings. INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES: All resources needed for these partnerships will be provided by the organizations with whom we are collaborating. SCHEDULE ADJUSTMENTS: Time will be set aside for Teacher Teams to meet with teaching artists and other partner organization staff. Teachers will also have time to attend professional development hosted by the partner organizations.  BUDGET: o Adult ESL classes, no cost; just a classroom o CookShop for students and families: No cost Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, school leadership will measure how many families have attended at least one event at PS 2, and will reassess marketing and PR strategies if less than 50% of families have attended one event. In addition, school leadership will meet with Teacher Teams to assess the value of these partnerships in February 2019. Furthermore-, family surveys will be developed and translated to determine how valuable parents and guardians found these partnerships to be, and whether they took advantage of the family programs and services 1  offered by these community organizations. The results of the Teacher Team meetings and family surveys will inform decision-making for the 2018-2019 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance comparisons will be made from last year to this present school year. The PTA will help to gather feedback at the PTA meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Student falls in the bottom 10% of the grade based on their assessed independent reading level using the TCRWP Benchmark Assessment System. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Leveled Literacy Intervention (guided reading and Word Work) Fundations (double dose) iReady Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day One-to-One Mathematics Science Social Studies Reading Rescue (1st grade only) Math facts practice Guided practice with multi-step word problems Small group During the school day Modifying curriculum Small group Use of technology During the school day Includes readings, use of hands on, interactive activities for the unit of study Modifying curriculum Use of technology Includes leveled texts for units of study. Small group During the school day Teacher monitored for individuals Student falls in the bottom 10% of the grade based on a universal mathematics screener. Student falls in the bottom 10% of the grade based on the grade level assessments in science. Student falls in the bottom 10% of the grade, based on the grade level assessments in social studies. 3  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Student who demonstrates consistent emotional distress and/or behavior, struggles that cannot be resolved by the classroom teacher At-risk counseling, collaboration with teacher, parent coordinator & social work to determine needs One-on-one or small group, depending on the severity of the problem During the school day 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 13 in Shelter, 65 in doubled up situations 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School materials as needed - stationery items, backpacks  Close monitoring of academic progress to provide academic support if needed   Outreach for services (food pantry, clothing donation, afterschool programs) as needed  Check-in by the counselor as needed Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 3 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5 Students will be provided with school materials as needed as well at risk counseling as needed. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Administrators peruse resumes and look for teachers who have teaching experience in the license area of need. If needed we also get input from staff regarding promising student teachers. Candidates are invited to come in for an interview with the administration and selected teachers on the grade of the vacancy. A select group of questions are asked in the following categories: - Knowledge of literacy curricula, and experience with the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Units of Study - Knowledge of mathematical pedagogical strategies, and experience with the Pearson Investigations and Math in Focus curriculum - Strong Classroom management techniques - Examples of collaboration with colleagues - Examples of effective communication with families After the interview, the committee decides whether the candidate is invited back to demonstrate a lesson. The lesson is observed by the interviewers and debriefed afterwards with the candidate. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). When a teacher is hired, the teachers on the grade are quick to make contact with the new teacher. A new teacher meeting is set up with the principal to provide support, supplies and a PS 2 handbook of procedures, protocols and schedules. The principal and/or assistant principal extend themselves to provide the pacing calendar and set up times to meet and provide support. The support includes: modeling lessons, discussing student work and setting up inter-class visits in areas of interest or need. 7  The mentoring process, along with ongoing support from PS 2’s system of support has proved to be very successful in terms of retaining new teachers. Teachers report feeling supported by their mentor, those on their grade, and other colleagues. Feedback is presented in such a way that new teachers feel confident implementing suggestions. In addition, we carefully match a new teacher to the grade-level that’s the best fit, given their skills and experience. To support the ongoing development of our teachers, - TCRWP staff developers meet and coach teachers - teachers attend TCRWP calendar day workshops - Universal Literacy Coach will work with K-2 teachers for minimum of 2 cycles throughout the year - STILE 2.0 coach for 4th and 5th grade - Teachers are identified for potential leadership and attend district workshop - Weekly Teacher Team meetings, at which time teachers look at student work and use the data to refine lesson and unit plans that are aligned to the Common Core State Standards - Bimonthly professional learning provided by district special education instructional leads - Professional learning offered by the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support (DELLSS) - Classroom inter visitations to observe effective practices - School inter visitations to learn from those who serve similar populations - Office of Teacher Development-sponsored PD on topics related to the Danielson Framework - Bi-monthly district meetings for Data and Math lead teachers In addition the Administrative Team participates in regular professional development, the learning from which they share with staff: - Monthly Network meetings - Chancellor’s meetings and workshops - Council of School Supervisors and Administrators workshops - District workshop for Paraprofessionals learning Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 8  n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). We partner with a neighboring community based pre-school where many of our incoming kindergarten families are enrolled. They bring these families to visit our kindergarten orientation sessions. They also assist parents in registering for kindergarten at PS 2. Further, we set a date in late June for all incoming kindergarten families to come for an orientation which includes a tour, handouts of school expectations, suggestions of how to help their child get ready for school and a copy of the September calendar. In September, there are scheduled grade orientations in which all families attend a group session covering the specifics of each grade. Families are also invited to their child’s classroom for a class orientation with the teacher. If there are students who have IEPs, the “Turning 5” children will have their records sent to the school and the IEP secretary and teacher will see that the needed supports are put into place. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. PS 2 is committed to using multiple measures to assess student progress. TCRWP assessments, rubrics and progressions are used to assess students. ELL teachers have reviewed the structure and expectations of the NYSESLAT to create ELL specific speaking standards and rubrics. In math, teachers are in the process of creating a math assessment based on a progression of math skills. Teachers will match appropriate math tasks to the grade math expectations. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 9  each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 458,818.00 24,893.00 30,287.00 0 3,872,368.00 x x x x Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5E 5A, 5C, 5D 5A, 5E 5A, 5B, 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 0   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Meyer London Elementary School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S. 2 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making to support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community Parent Coordinator is keeping parents/families informed of events, notices and communication through Wechat Parental Involvement and School Quality The PS 2 Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The PS 2 Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Meyer London Elementary School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 3  ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the "Every Student Succeeds Act" (ESSA) I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to October 30th of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 4  Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the "Every Student Succeeds Act" (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 5  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: According to a study by the National Assessment of Educational Process [NAEP] 44% of a representative sample of the nation's fourth graders scored low in fluency. The study also found a close relationship between fluency and comprehension. Students who scored low on fluency also scored low on comprehension. Other studies indicated that a readers theater program can effectively enhance reading fluency, and subsequently comprehension. For this reason we chose to use Readers' Theater scripts as texts for practicing reading fluency. Students will be fully immersed in the process of reading and role-playing various scripts and plays in different genres to build reading fluency and expression. The students will have ample opportunities to read, listen, write and discuss each script or play. The students will develop and improve on many of the strategies needed when reading plays and scripts such as; oral language fluency and expression, listening skills. In addition, students' confidence will increase when speaking in public. We will align the Title III after-school program to the ESL Standard 2: Students will listen, speak, read and write English for literary response, enjoyment and expression. We will also align and focus on the CCLS Language Standards K-5: Vocabulary Acquisition #4- Determine or clarify the meaning of unknown and multiple meaning words and phrases based on grades three- four's reading and content, choosing flexibility from the range of strategies and #5- Demonstrate understanding of word relationships and nuances in word meaning to help our Our NYSESLAT data indicates that there is a greater need for our emerging/entering/transitioning ELLs in grades three and five to work on their listening and speaking domains. We believe the Reader's Theater will support our students' English language development by developing fluency and understanding of character in stories. Furthermore, students will develop not only reading fluency but also oral fluency. Students not only read and role play stories, but they will also plan, write, revise and publish their own script. These scripts can be adapted from stories or their own original stories. They will perform these scripts. Reader's Theater has been found as a best practice for motivating struggling readers as well [Rasinski,1999]. The Readers Theater Program will include 87 ELLs in grades 2, and grades 3 through 5 who scored in the entering/emerging/transitional levels in the NYSESLAT. There will be three groups of 28 ELLs per class. Each group will be taught by a classroom teacher and a ESL certified teacher. The ESL teacher will provide at least 50% of the instructional time for the group of students they work with. The class will meet every Wednesday and Thursday from 2:45-4:15 pm from January 2018 to April 2018 for a total of 18 weeks [3 hours per week]. The classes will be taught in English. To support students' fluency and provide models of practice, students will be able to borrow books on tape/cds, tape players to hear standard English , syntax and pronunciation at home with parents. * Guided reading and increased comprehension skills. * Students will perform an adapted play or skit to be shared with family and friends during our Title III Sharing of Student Learning. All students will have the opportunity to use computer technology, digital cameras, and I-Pads as tools for research and performance. 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information *Instructional materials, including Readers' Theater kits, fairy tale books, and book-making supplies will be purchased. Qualitative assessment will include teacher observations, student work portfolios evaluated against a co-constructed speaking rubrics, writing evaluated using the Teachers College Writing Progression, and NYSESLAT scores. For our 4th to 5th grade ELLs who scored "extending" in the 2018 NYSESLAT, they will participate in a Digital Publishing Program. Students will read articles from a variety of sources and use them as mentor texts for their own writing. Teachers will teach students how notice newsworthy events, report on them and then write them. Students will also learn to write for an audience. Students will learn a wide range of literacy skills: questioning, note-taking, expository and persuasive writing. Students will also learn to use technology tools (I pads, flip cameras, etc) to publish their paper. This group will have 25-30 ELLs, partnered with a classroom teacher and certified teacher to work with this group of expanding students. The Journalism Program will meet every Wednesday and Thursday from 2:45 to 4:15 pm from January 2019 to April 2019 for 14 weeks [3 hours a week] and it may continue to the end of the school year at no additional cost to the Title III program. The classes will be taught in English. This following instructional materials will be purchased for the Title III program: Readers Theater Kits [4],notebooks, Craft supplies for making scenery,sets and puppets for plays for Reader's Theater program.We will also purchase ipad keyboards, ink, copy and photo papers to be used for the digital publishing program to record news segments ,interviews, take photo ,type stories,and to create slide shows. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development Program for the Title III teachers will include the following: The 8 Title III teachers will have on going study group to develop and administer language assessments which will be analyzed for unit planning and to adjust student goals during the program. They will use the data to strategically plan for lessons using the Understanding by Design template. Data will include strands for speaking, listening, reading and writing. The dates of the meetings are as follows: December 6th 2:45-4:15 pm Session 1- Study of NYSESLAT speaking and listening rubrics and levels. Developing student assessment for the Title 3 program. December 13th 2:45- 4:15 Study of the NYSESLAT reading and writing rubrics and levels and its intersection with the Teachers College Reading and Writing Levels. January 4th 8th 2:45-4:15 pm Analysis of Title 3 preassessment data based on teacher developed assessments (sessions 1 and 2) March 29th - 2:45 - 4:15 Analysis of Title 3 post assessment student data Teachers will implement these protocols in their classroom and reflect o the process and the impact on the student learning. The study group sessions will be facilitated by an ENL teacher from the program teachers and the teacher will be paid 6 per session hours. 9  Part C: Professional Development Before the program starts, in addition, teachers will study NYSESLAT data, classroom assessments (TC reading and writing assessments) to inform planning instructional goals for the Title III program at no cost to te Title III program Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: PS 2 will conduct parent involvement activities that will promote parent understanding of their children's language learning as well as provide resources that they can use at home. We will invite all ELL parents by sending home letters and invitation in English , Chinese and Spanish. They will also participate in a year end sharing of student's learning and work. All workshops will have Chinese and Spanish translators so that parents can understand their child's learning and growth. Our Parent Coordinator ,Vera Chang will provide Chinese translation at no cost to the program. Parent Workshops for 2018-2019 December 6, 2018 We will invite parents to a Title III meeting to review program goals provide a Q&A session that will support parents to understand CCLS and to share other workshop and events we will have for their child. The sessions will be facilitated by two ELL teachers who will be paid per session. January 17th, 2019 and February 13th The ELL Parent Technology sessions- will be facilitated by the ENL teacher and bilingual teachers to introduce parents to the apps currently on students' ipads and how to utilize them at home for further learning. Parents will use the apps and will be guided to downloading the app for home use. April 18th, 2019 Parents will be invited to the Sharing of student learning from the Title III program. The students will be performing the adapted version of the play they learned in Title III with family and friends. We will purchase refreshment for this event [$250.00] The parent workshops will be at cost to Title III. 0 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name Meyer London Borough Manhattan School Number 002 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Silvana Ng Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Janice Lee/ ESL Coordinator Teacher/Subject Area Tracey Adler/ ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Moy / ENL teacher Related-Service Provider Lucilla Chan/Spec. Ed. Coordin Superintendent Bonnie Laboy Assistant Principal Katherine Boshart Coach n/a School Counselor Sandra Reina Parent Maggie Chin Parent Coordinator Vera Chang Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 2 8 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 551 Total number of ELLs 175 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 31.76% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Mandarin If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 Lang. Mand. 1 0 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 0 1 2 1 0 1 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At PS 2, we use the following assessment tools: 1. Fundations formative assessment and progress monitoring which is included in each lesson 2, Teachers College Reading & Writing literacy assessments - early skills (book handling, letter/sound, sight words) and Independent Reading Assessments (running records). These are used to determine students' phonics, word study and reading needs. 3. Teachers College Reading and Writing unit rubrics. For each writing unit, students produce a pre-assessment piece to determine strengths and challenges in their writing within the particular genre of writing. At the end of the unit, a post assessment piece is independently written by the student to assess which skills have been learned and to identify next steps in 3  the student's writing development. 3. During student work time (independent and group), teachers are conferring with students and jotting observational notes for use in planning for student needs. 4. In math, end of unit assessment includes a word problem and analysis of student's answers enable teachers to better address math content language skills. Beginning of the year data indicates that: 1. Current September 2017 TCRWP reading assessments indicates that only 28% of ELLs are at or above standards in reading. Students who are not on grade level are in our lower grades and are newly arrived to the country (within 1-2 years). The older students who are far below grade level tend to be our ELLs with IEPs. For students who are approaching grade level, their work is in comprehension - for lower grades, it is generally vocabulary dependent needs but for upper grades 3 to 5, students still need more support in identifying themes and complex character traits. 2. As texts becomes more complex and the sentence structure becomes more complex, students require support in making meaning. This is particular evident in multi-step math word problems in which students are having difficulty with words such as "each", "of which", and "per amount." 3. Writing data indicates that students have the structure of the genre but continue to need support in elaboration. Teachers use this information to create instructional plans. In these, planning also includes small groups to provide for instruction in targeted areas as indicated by the assessments. Planning will also include individual charts, rubrics, mentor texts that will support the reader, writer and mathematician. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 1. Weekly grade team meetings includes the teachers, ENL teacher, and Academic Intervention Team (AIT) teacher. This ensures that specific needs of student populations and individual students are addressed in a collaborative and cohesive plan. 2. For the integrated ENL periods, the ESL teacher and the classroom co-plan lessons either co-teach or parallel teach the lessons. In the stand alone ENL periods, the ESL teacher uses the assessments to plan for next steps in student learning. The ESL teacher will also co-plan with the classroom teachers so the context for the new learning is aligned to the classroom's current unit of study. 3. Teachers also analyze and summarize student formative data to look at trends not only within the class but also with the grade. The data provides information about next steps. Teachers then met to plan for how theses needs should be met. 4. Regular scheduled ENL teacher team meetings (once a month) is when ENL teachers discuss and plan for ENL needs with the students and the grade that they service. During these meetings, teachers will look at schoolwide ENL data and also formative assessments from the classroom. This leads to discussion of best practice and possible intervention plans for students. 5. Teachers College staff developers in literacy and in data support teachers with coaching in best literacy practices and strategies that can support student learning, including ENL learning. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 1. NYSESLAT scores are analyzed to determine areas of progress and need. Analysis of the different NYSESLAT strands - listening, speaking, reading and writing- is used to determine next steps for student learning. In addition, student trends are identified for those who making growth and those that have remained or dropped in language proficiency levels. For those students, a deeper analysis may include other formative literacy assessments (running records, writing assessments) to identify specific skills that need to be taught. 4  2. For the upper grades ELA and Math state scores are analyzed. The data provides information about students' grade level performance and a comparison for their NYSESLAT language proficiency performance. 3. ELA and math item analyses indicate that long responses continues to be an area that can be improved. Students are able to answer short responses - an answer with supporting details. However, when a long ELA response that requires crafting to include introduction, conclusion and insightful thinking, ELLs tend to falter. 4. Student interviews and conferences indicate that students have basic interpersonal communication skills but are working towards more academic and literary language skills. 5. Teacher created assessments indicate that students can express their ideas but require more support and learning to elaborate their ideas. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data has been gathered: 1. ENL teachers collaborate with classroom teachers to plan for groupings and identified areas of need in students' language learning. A schedule is created so that the ENL teachers work can be "pushed in" during literacy times or "pull out" for those who require programming that is not in the teacher's curriculum. These pull out sessions often are for our newly arrived ELLs who need more support in oral speaking and phonics learning support. 2. The weekly grade teams analyze the data and the classroom teacher identify language learning needs for the students. These needs are then incorporated into teacher plans when teaching all contents. 3. Information is shared with pedagogical staff during grade team meetings, whole day professional meetings to investigate trends across all grades and not just within one grade. 4. Intervention is provided after analysis of the data indicates that a student has not demonstrated progress as evidenced by at least 2-3 areas of assessments - NYSESLAT, ELA and formative assessments. By analyzing the different language strands - teachers can identify and prioritize the student needs: speaking, listening, reading and/or writing. Tier 1 interventions in class is provided to the student and if s/he requires more support then s/he is brought up for more targeted intervention - small group or individual. Intervention support is usually provided by the AIT teachers. However, for grade 1, we also have teachers trained in Reading Rescue who can also provide reading intervention. For other grades, services may include Fundations, Wilson or individual support. 5. Teachers also participate in professional learning to meet the needs of ELL students. Teachers will participate in Teacher College Reading and Writing Project Workshops that focus on ELL students. Teachers will also participate in Division of Englsh Language Learner workshops. P.S. 2's ELL coordinator will participate in District 2' monthly ELL liaison meetings. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We use the RTI framework to guide our instruction for ELLs. 1. In Tier 1 ,all students receive high quality core instruction in the classrooms. Lessons and independent work is differentiated to meet the needs of students. Teachers will also provide students with resources and supports to promote independent work. Supports may include individualized reference charts, mentor texts, paper choice, and/or reminder bookmarks. Teachers regularly confer and meet with student groups in reading and writing to support students in learning and mastering targeted skills. In Tier 1, math communication skills can also be a focus.We evaluate students' progress in Tier 1 5  core instruction through routine assessment. Students are placed into Tier 2 groups based on skills and needs. 2. In Tier 2 and Tier 3, there are support teachers to meet the needs of ELLs. - In Tier 2, ENL teachers and AIT teachers will meet the needs of identified students, generally through pull-out sessions. In these sessions, teachers will work small groups with a particular focus. Some examples are: speaking, writing within a genre structure, work knowledge and guided reading.Students are assessed by teacher created materials and/or running records at three or more points throughout the Tier 2 cycle. Teachers administer a pre, mid and post assessment. This data is then analyzed in addition to teacher observations. If minimal progress is made in Tier 2, teachers discuss whether to extend the Tier 2 interventions or implement Tier 3 for the student. - In Tier 3, individual sessions are scheduled by AIT teachers and Reading Rescue teachers to target reading and writing in which students are significantly behind in grade level work and production. Tier 2 and Tier 3 interventions are scheduled in cycles to identify area of need, implement instruction and assess for student improvement. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The outcome assessments we use to evaluate and inform our ELL programs include NYSESLAT, ELA and Math state exams. We review the ELL Data Analysis Tool data to help inform our ENL programs and create appropriate groupings to meet compliance requirements. NYSESLAT results are analyzed for information about: 1) students' progression in language proficiency levels; 2) achievement levels of each language modalities: speaking, listening, reading and writing; 3) alignment of results to other formative assessments (i.e. reading levels, writing progression grade equivalency and if applicable, 4) ELA results disaggregated into multiple choice and writing results. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ESL teachers summarize and analyze the schoolwide NYSESLAT report. The report is analyzed with the following guiding questions: The EDAT is also used to make adjustments to instructional plans. The ELl teachers their analyses and findings with the classroom and intervention teachers during grade level meetings. Summary of schoolwide data is shared with staff to provide information about areas of successful practice and areas for growth and further investigation. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The goal of our Free Standing ENL program is to provide instruction in English for our ELLs and support in academic subject area using ESL methodology to help the ELLs meet or exceed NYS and City standards. The number of English units the students receive is determined by his/her English proficiency level on the NYSESLAT or for newly admitted students, NYSITELL: 6  Students are grouped by identified need and the ESL teacher is part of the grade team that meets together for planning and all professional development. Units are planned by the grade with additional accommodations for IEP ELL students in the grade. Therefore, when integrated ENL service is provided, the ESL teachers support student learning through collaboration with the classroom teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. The Transitional Bilingual Program provides instruction in Mandarin language arts and bilingual content in math and social studies. The instruction for ELLs is delivered bases on students' proficiency levels as assessed by the NYSITELL or the NYSELSAT, whichever is the most recent: All students in TBE programs receive instruction in Mandarin language arts targeting the development of Mandarin oral language in speaking and listening. The students are heterogeneously grouped within their classses. c. DL program. If applicable. We do not have a Dual Language Program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We refer to the ELL Policy Guide to ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes are met according to the proficiency level of each program model. 1. After we receive the NYSESLAT scores, the ESL team meets and reviews the RLAT to determine compliance issues and schedule services for all the ENLs in the school. They work with classroom teachers to provide mandated ESL services. The RLAT report is used to determine the mandated numbers of instructional hours that are needed. Then the ESL teacher and the classroom teachers determine a schedule that will not only meet the compliance hours but also meet the literacy needs of the students. 2. The team also reviews the EDAT to determine instructional implications for the ENLs and shares findings with classroom teachers during their professional periods early in the school year. The ESL make recommendations and review reports with classroom teachers about the ELLs strengths and needs based on the LS/RW modalities of the NYSESLAT. 3. Home Language Art (HLA) is delivered in the bilingual classes by the teachers. Teachers focus on the speaking and listening Mandarin language modalities. Teachers focus on read alouds and develop students' discussion skills to summarize stories, infer about characters and to explain new learning. Teachers will introduce basic Chinese words and begin to develop students' word recognition skills. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In bilingual classes, core content in math and social studies is taught in Mandarin and other subjects are taught in English. For literacy, bilingual teachers uses ESL strategies (visuals, total physical response, hands-on experiences, repetition of content, scaffolded language) to support students in the Teachers College Reading and Writing Curriculum. For stand alone ESL classes, English is the language of instruction, with home language support. In these classes and small groups, ENL services, teachers may front load academic vocabulary, use texts that are on students' reading level and provide scaffolded discussion of content materials. Teachers prepare for their lessons to ensure that the students are introduced to the vocabulary of the new content area. Texts with visual support are used during lessons. Students are encouraged to read books that are at their own individual reading levels and are assessed on a regular basis by the classroom teacher. Small group work with students based on teacher assessments provide the support for the students as needed. Discussion skills are emphasized in all content areas. Students are explicitly taught and are expected to make their thinking visible through oral talk. They participate in partnerships across literacy areas in reading and writing as well as math partnerships. To support students in meeting standards, the academic conversations incorporate content vocabulary and Tier 7  2 vocabulary words. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are informally evaluated in their home language through student work products in reading and writing (for upper grade students). For younger ELLs, evaluation is through teacher conferences and informal interviews as students are working independently. At registration, students are interviewed in English and their home language to determine their language proficiency. Students are provided with an array of materials in which they can access their home language: books written in their native language, translated books in which they can participate in book talk, nonfiction books in their native language for content reading and research projects. Furthermore, students have individual ipads in which internet web resources can provide materials for their learning. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiation for our instruction for ELL subgroups are as follows: SIFE students: Instructional approaches will vary for these students depending on factors such as the level of native language skills. In addition to academic intervention and after-school programs, we also teach grade level content with varied levels of scaffolding. These students will be partnered with English-speaking peers to provide motivation, support and language acquisition opportunities. We will continue to focus on vocabulary acquisition by distinguishing Shades of Meaning and focusing on content-area reading. Newcomer students are served with the intention of giving them the language skills they need to function successfully in their new community and school. They will be placed with English-speaking peers in an age appropriate environment in order to present them with language acquisition opportunities and extrinsic motivation, as well as support from peers. Since many newcomers arrive with little to no English in any of the four language skill areas, they will receive ESL services that are intended to provide both content area and second language instruction with the intent of developing BICS [Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills] and CALP [Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency. Literacy and language development will take place through student participation in the reading and writing workshops in class as well further more specialized instruction after school in Title III programs. They will also participate in all after-school programs and clubs [ELA/Math test preparation ]. Our primary focus for the Developing ELLs (ELLs for 4-6 years) who have been receiving services will be to develop cognitive academic language proficiency (CALP) so they can achieve mastery of reading and writing skills for application in the academic content areas. There is emphasis on developing understanding in the reading and understanding of Tier 2 words and complex sentences. Some ELLs may receive one to one instruction for academic support, specific to grade and content. Our primary focus for long term ELLs (ELLs for more than 6 years) is to analyze NYSESLAT results to identify areas of challenge or little growth. Based on the analysis, targeted instruction will be provided in the particular area of literacy. These areas have included: using text evidence to make a valid inference, identifying importance in text and synthesizing text to identify main ideas and themes. Former ELLs will continue to receive 2 years of integrated ENL services. We will continue to support their academic needs and provide academic vocabulary support. If needed they will receive academic intervention services. 8  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Some of the instructional strategies employed for our ELL-SWDs population are as follows: 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In creating a flexible and supportive environment that educates those students with IEPs together with those without IEPs, we have eight ICT classes, which are staffed with successful teams of general education and special education teachers as well as two self-contained special education class for grades K-2 and grades 3-5. We are committed to creating high quality and innovative instructional design for all students, those who are special education students and those who are general education students. ENL staff are active participants in our ELL-SWDs education decision making. They attend AIT meetings to discuss students who may be at risk of requiring intervention. After a plan is created, the ENL teacher is involved in providing some of the interventions that were discussed. They also attend IEP meetings and parent meetings to provide ENL expertise and help ELL-SWDs achieve their IEP goals. When planning for reading and writing workshop, ENL staff provides teachers with ELL modifications and scaffolding to ensure all students have access to the curriculum. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs identified as requiring intervention are serviced as follows: 1. ELA Intervention for ELL students reading and writing at least one year below grade level 2. Math Intervention for ELL students performing at least one year below grade level 3. For ELLs who are demonstrating difficulty in Science, the science teachers work with student is small groups once a week. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on data on our EDAT report we noticed a majority of our ELLs need support in speaking and writing. These two modalities were noted as low performing on the NYSESLAT. Next year we will focus on these two modalities during instruction. These two modalities are linked so when we focus on skills in these areas an increase in student ability should be noted. For example, when we teach sentence expansion in writing students can transfer this into expanding their speaking as well. We were awarded the AppleConnectED grant in which all our students received an Ipad to use. Included in this grant will be many programs that the teachers can use for whole class and small group work. With this new technology, our students will use their Ipads to support speaking and writing tasks. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not have any new programs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. The school offers all ELLs equal access to all school programs during the school day and after school. All invitations for school programs are available in English, Chinese and Spanish. The school also offers the following supplemental services for the ELLs: 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our school was awarded the AppleConnect grant which provides individual resource for each student. Every student has their own Ipad with applications that support all content areas. Students are assigned ebooks within their reading level and are able to access different levels of informational texts for content studies and research. Applications such as Imagine Learning and 9  other online literacy programs provide individualized learning and pacing for targeted skills. All classrooms have Smartboards, laptops and AppleTV for teachers to access additional materials and resources. Each Bilingual classroom has books and resources in the home language to bolster student learning, not in English but also in his/her native language. The student math workbooks are translated in Chinese to not only support student learning but also facilitate school-home learning. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our ENL classes, we use native language to support comprehension, preview or review content lessons and as a scaffold to clarify topics (when scaffolds are no longer needed it is gradually removed). We use bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. We also have bilingual books on tapes and CD for students to borrow for home use. In our TBE classes, the Bilingual teacher uses the native language to teach 2 units of content instruction. The classrooms have bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, bilingual literature, as well as mentor texts that are used with TC Reading and Writing project. The bilingual classroom teachers have bilingual literature books on tapes and CDs for students to borrow for home use. We also have a lending library of bilingual books on tape/CD for parents to borrow in the ESL room. The bilingual teachers also utilize the preview and review model to teach content wherever applicable. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services are aligned to students' grade levels and ages. All resources are also age- and grade-appropriate. Since PS 2 has such a large population of English Language Learners, we have accumulated a large variety of age-appropriate resources from which to draw upon. Our ELL team also makes resources to support the classroom teachers' lessons that correspond to ELLs ages and grade level. We are in regular contact with foreign language publishers to preview and purchase materials for native language learning. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are not a co-located with another school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We host an Orientation in June for new students to learn about PS2. It is organized and facilitated by our bilingual Parent Coordinator and the ESL teacher team. When new students enroll they meet the parent coordinator and Principal as well as tour the building. Students will meet their teacher and receive a buddy who speaks the same native language. An ESL teacher will work with student groups to acclimate them to school. Since some students will arrive with little or no English language skills, they will receive native language instruction to further develop literacy and language in their L1 with our bilingual teachers. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer no language electives at this time to our ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not have a Dual Language program. 0  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Because of our high percentage of ELLs and former ELLs, all of our teachers participate in professional development that addresses the needs of ELLs. Specifically, teachers will engage in the following professional learning: 1. Teachers College Reading and Writing Project All teachers will participate in working with an upper and lower grade Teachers College staff developer to work on employing the TCRWP units throughout the school year. Each grade will meet with the staff developer for 3 cycles of 3 weekly meetings to plan and implement lessons in labsites. Teachers will also attend full day workshops throughout the year at Teacher's College campus on various topics offered by TC. Teachers will study ELL learning within the reading and writing workshop. Selected ELL teachers will participate in 2 day long TC workshops to specific study ELL learning and accommodations within the reading and writing workshop. 2. Manhattan Field Support (MSF) and Division of English Language Learners and Student Supports (DELLSS) All teachers will be offered the opportunity to attend professional development workshops offered from MFS and DELLS such as : Integrated co-teaching for ELLs, New Language Arts Progressions, ELL Data Analysis Tool, Academic Conversations. The ELL coordinator will attend monthly ELL Liaison Meetings. 3. MFSC Bilingual Instructional Lead will support bilingual teachers with at least once cycle of 3 sessions of professional development during the Monday PD time. 3. TERC Investigations All teachers will participate in professional development on TERC Investigations program and how to address ELL learning in math. Initial professional meeting will be provided by the publisher, Pearson. Thereafter the MFSC Math Instructional Lead, Dorothy Sanabria will provide professional learning to lower grade teachers. The needs of the ELLs will be part of the discussion. New learning for all professional development will be shared with the grade team and will be on the school's google drive for everyone to access. 4. For non-pedagogical staff, 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The vast majority of the professional development described above has a focus on strategies for ELL. Therefore, our teachers will meet the 15% of PD hours required under CR Part 154. Additionally, our bilingual and ENL teachers will meet the 50% of PD hours required. In addition, the ENL team will plan and deliver monthly ELL-related professional development. Some topics that will be discussed will be Co-teaching for ELLs, ELL Data Analysis Tool, and ELL compliance and ELL identification. Teachers keep records by sharing agendas and notes from professional development sessions and post to PS 2's Google Drive. There are copies of agendas and notes in the ENL Coordinator's room. Administrators monitor sign-in sheets to ensure teachers are in attendance. 1. Monthly ENL Lead workshops held by the MFSC. The information is then turnkeyed and shared with all ELL teachers. 2. 10 Sessions of Staff Development and coaching through TCRWP, approximately every other month. Teachers will study balanced literacy components and plan for student's reading learning including those for ELLs. 3. Teachers will attend specific workshops specifically for ELL learning. In September, an ELL teacher attended a 2 day workshop Adapting Units of Study for ELLs that was sponsored through TCRWP, 1  4. Teachers will attend 1 or 2 bilingual or ELL workshops sponsored by the Department of Education that specifically addresses ELL learning. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In the beginning of the year, ESL teachers meet with parents individually to discuss NYSESLAT test reports and student's language development and looking at the EDAT. In addition, during the Fall Grade Orientations, parents learn about the curriculum and grade expectations. They are also informed about how ELL learning is addressed within the classroom and as a service. Parents regularly participate in our monthly classroom events, PTA meetings and various workshops. Workshops that focus on student learning will always include information about ELL learning. Our parents are always welcome to make appointments to have conferences with the ELL team. Parent engagement times are utilized for discussions about student learning and progress. All meetings are translated into Chinese and Spanish, as needed. PS 2 outreaches through phone to discuss student's learning if parents are unable to attend a face-to-face meeting. Records are maintained through a sign-in sheet and phone log. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. P.S. 2 is committed to parent involvement and provides extensive opportunities for parents of ELLs to be involved in our school: P.S. 2 also schedules specific programs and workshops during the school year. All programs provide Chinese translation and Spanish, as needed: Family Cookshop - Monthly, second Friday of the Month staring in January 2018 October - Title 1 Parent Meeting; Organize, chaperone and translate for Middle School Tours (approximately 8 District 2 middle schools) November - Middle School Process Workshop and guidance for completing middle school application December - Performances in Music and Dance February - Parent Workshop - Literacy Learning for ELLs March - Parent Workshop regarding NYSESLAT May - Title 3 Project Celebration Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. PS 2 offers our students and family a great variety of programs. A highlight of our school is that we were granted the AppleConnect grant and teachers are integrating technology into their daily lessons. Technology is also the tool in which students can continue their learning at home by signing into school purchased programs such as Imagine Learning, EPIC, brainpop and razzkids. Some special programs that our school offers to all of our students across all grades are Chess in the Schools, Music and the Brain, National Dance Institute and the Center for Architecture. Our school hosts several CBO programs that work with families to support the children's learning such as homework help, tutoring and enrichment activities. The CBOs also provide meals and host celebrations. The parent coordinator hosts visits to local hospitals to inform parents of services available. Our school has a school-wide "wechat" account to disseminate information to our families electronically. Many classes participate in Cookshop in Schools program during the day, while parents are invited in monthly to participate in Cookshop for Families program. We also host Adult ESL classes where all parents are invited to come and learn English. 2  3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Silvana Ng, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Meyer London School DBN: 02M002 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Silvana Ng Title Principal Katherine Boshart Assistant Principal Vera Chang Janice Lee Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Tracey Adler Teacher/Subject Area n/a Bonnie Laboy Special Ed Coordinator Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 07/21/17 7/21/17 9/6/17 9/6/17 9/6/17 07/21/17 Lucilla Chan 9/6/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 002 School Name: PS 2 Superintendent: Bonnie Laboy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Vera Chang Parent Coordinator yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When our families come into the school for registration, a staff member will speak with them and will find out what language the parent is most comfortable communicating in. Information from the Home Language Identification Survey, ATS reports and looking at the Student Emergency Contact cards also provide the information we can use. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Chinese 825 78% 312 28.6% 6  Spanish English Cantonese 11 217 0 1.04% 20.59% 0 12 214 74 1.14% 20.3% 7.02% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Our languages are included in the DOE 9 approved languages. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families First Week in September. Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parents Coordinator will translate these documents. Invitations and dates for grade wide parent orientations, monthly calendar, pick up & dismissal procedures, permission slips for upper grades to walk home alone, pick up authorization forms; after-school program information, photo release, blue emergency contact cards. Monthly Newsletter September - June Parent Teacher Conferences September, November, March, May Bilingual staff will help translate these documents. Parent Coordinator will translate these documents. Invitation for Parent Workshops and School Wide Events September to June Parents Coordinator will translate these documents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 7  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent teacher conferences September, November, March and May Parent Coordinator, bilingual staff, IEP Meetings September to June Parent Meetings as per request from classroom teachers September to June over the phone interpretation service (Language Line) and an outside translation service will help teachers translate during these meetings. Parent Coordinator, Bilingual Social Worker and Bilingual staff will help translate during these meetings. Parent Coordinator and Bilingual stuff will help translate at these meetings. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the beginning of each school year, parents complete and updated 2 new blue emergency contact cards. These are kept in the office and with the classroom teacher. In addition, parents are invited to sign up for a school wide WeChat group that disseminates information in their preferred language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Language Access Coordinator will attend professional development and turnkey pertinent information to the staff. Staff will be made aware of Chancellor's Regulation A-663. Memo's, workshops, forms and letters are submitted in a timely fashion to be translators. All school wide forms are available for parents. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We have signs translated into Chinese and Spanish posted by the Security desk and in the general office for parents to view. All translated parent forms such as school calendar, Pick up and Dismissal schedule etc...are available in the main office and in the school lobby. We place the Language Access kit which contains multilingual resources and information in the main office with the parent coordinator. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 8  Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will have a parent survey to gather information on the quality and availability of our translation services. Informal conversations with parents at our PTA meetings, and our PTA board will also provide feedback. After every parent workshop lead by the parent coordinator, parents complete a survey providing feedback. 9 
