 02M003 School Name: P.S. 003 CHARRETTE SCHOOL Principal: HILLARY CASADO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 3 – Charrette School 02M003 School Number (DBN): 310200010003 PK – 5 490 Hudson Street, New York, NY 10014 212-691-1183 Phone Number: 212-675-5306 Fax: HillaryCasado hcasado@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: HillaryCasado Michael DeShields Mark Hsu Jennifer Milligan/ Emily Alexander N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 02 Superintendent’s Office Address: DonaldaChumney Superintendent: 333 Seventh Avenue, 7 th floor, New York, NY 10001 dchumney@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3815 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director:   333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001 Executive Director’s Office Address: ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-705-5856 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Hillary Casado Michael DeShields Rebecca Shine N/A N/A N/A N/A Emily Alexander Jennifer Astuto Anne Borges Amy Claire *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Clair Aronow Jean Gallagher Miriam Yeung Lindsey Halligan Elizabeth Jackson Arthur John Opel Jennifer Milligan JJ Venne Andrea Franks Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The following mission statement, which is posted on our school website ps3nyc.org, was written collaboratively by parents and teachers. It gives a good overview of our school.   OUR CORE VALUES: INDEPENDENCE – EVERY CHILD COUNTS P.S. 3’s curriculum is built on high academic standards while taking into account the learning styles of our students. CREATIVE EXPLORATION THROUGH ACADEMICS AND THE ARTS P.S. 3's integrated arts curriculum fosters creative thinking, scientific curiosity and a love of learning. COMMUNITY MATTERS We demonstrate democracy in action: parents, teachers, administration and the community at large collaborate to translate the values of the school into real world practice. The following mission statement, which is posted on our school website ps3nyc.org, was written collaboratively by parents and teachers. It gives a good overview of our school. MISSION STATEMENT Children at P.S. 3 - Independence P.S. 3 provides children with a vibrant learning environment that nurtures their intellectual, social, physical and emotional growth. Children learn through hands-on involvement with subjects and materials that are connected to the world around them. Teachers and staff members at P.S. 3 actively encourage children to take initiative, be resourceful, and show independence and discernment in their classroom work. At P.S. 3, children collaborate and communicate with fellow students of all ages. Our mission at P.S. 3 is to encourage all children to become confident self-motivated lifelong learners, and inspire them to become compassionate human beings. Teaching and Learning - Innovation At P.S. 3, the integrated arts curriculum teaches children to examine their world from a broader perspective, deepening their academic curiosity and love of learning. The attention to STEM and Social Studies as a domain integrated with literacy stimulates engagement and challenges all learners. Teachers meet regularly to exchange ideas on the best learning tools, practices, and impact on student learning. By maintaining a responsive educational model, teachers are able to provide instruction and support that corresponds to students’ individual needs. The teachers at P.S. 3 place a high value on academic standards and risk taking, while honoring the diverse approaches, backgrounds, and contexts that students require to learn and grow successfully. Community The concept of community is paramount to P.S. 3’s identity. We focus on our relationships with each other, the surrounding neighborhood, our city, and the world at large. Bias free learning and a respect for others is the foundation for meaningful education. Empathy and understanding for a range of experiences is embedded in curriculum and honored as lived experiences. We utilize concepts “big and small” to develop empathy and respect, while nurturing individual curiosity and driving a passion for learning inside and outside of school. Finally, children at P.S. 3 develop the capacity to embrace a greater understanding of the world, to celebrate difference, and to strive to be of service to local and global communities. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 0  Since its foundation in 1971, PS 3 has maintained a vibrant school community that has continuously upheld its commitment to:    inclusive education of the whole child strong parent participation the integration of the arts into the curriculum, while maintaining high academic expectations This has been supported by working closely with the Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) in a number of areas:  Partnering with staff to study diversity within the school community facilitated by New York University (NYU)       Metro Center, followed by the creation of a PTA Diversity Committee. School staff participation in Professional Learning offered by NYU in supporting the "Emotionally Vulnerable Child." Supporting arts through mini-grants to teachers for artists-in-residence that support an area of the academic curriculum Supporting music and ceramics programs using teaching artists Supporting a partnership with the Whitney Museum Supporting a partnership with the Ailey Dance Company/City Center Supporting a partnership with Wellness in the Schools, as well as a supplemental cooking and nutrition program In addition, the school places a strong emphasis on social awareness, extending beyond our borders. Students' understanding of global events is strengthened by student participation in coat drives, food drives, fund raising for UNICEF and partnership with Safe Passage that maintains a school for students from impoverished families in Guatemala. At the same time, we support students in achieving high academic standards by partnering with Read Ahead and the Go Project. We are an NYU Partnership School, which provides us with mutually beneficial support for the education of our students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P.S. 3’s history of responsive education and its focus on individual access has resulted in a significant population of students with a range of special needs. Some are formally identified, others are simply observable. We have continued to see growth in the population of students with significant learning and attentional disabilities. This has led to a growing number of ICT classes and more staff who are dually certified in general and special education. Since we were aware that the 2017-18 school year would be the final year for our centrally funded Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) program, we have worked to develop awareness, skills and capacity among the school staff as a whole in working with students who display autism spectrum behaviors, whether these have been diagnosed as such or not. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 1  Rigorous Instruction: We are proud to have eliminated our lower grade 12:1:1 classroom and to have integrated the students in this class into our Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) program. With support from the Manhattan School Support Center (MSSC), we were able to customize the instruction in ICT classes to meet the needs of a notably wide range of learners. We also had upper grade students who followed this same trajectory and made significant gains in their academic skills and behavior. Our (English as New Language) ENL teacher has likewise taken advantage of professional development from the MSSC and has worked successfully with newcomers in all grades on a range of academic skills and socio-cultural knowledge. She has partnered with several of our classroom teachers both in her daytime and after-school programs. We have continued to follow up on District 2's efforts to extend high quality math instruction. Our math specialist has continued to support teachers in strengthening our math curriculum and instruction. She has participated in the District's math specialist meetings, and has supported teachers in planning and teaching, and students with small group instruction/Academic Intervention Services (AIS) and Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS). We extended our use of Dreambox software that we had piloted last school year, with all fourth grade classes and our self-contained 3/4/5 class using it to supplement the math curriculum and to provide individually customized instruction. In the spring, we were able to give our fifth grade classes access to the software as well. In literacy, through the support of the PTA, we were able to have an F-status literacy staff developer who supported curriculum development and worked in cycles supporting teacher planning and instruction. She and one of our classroom teachers participated in a Professional Learning Opportunity (PLO) offered by the Manhattan Field Support Center on using data in literacy instruction. They used a robust set of data drawn from multiple standard and classroom sources to develop strategies. They then designed and facilitated a PLO for our 2nd/3rd grade teachers, sharing their strategies. They were also invited to participate in the Field Support Center's PLO Expo. A team of four teachers representing grades K through 3, accompanied by the principal, attended a Manhattan Field Center PLO on the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). They 2nd/3rd grade representatives applied what they had learned to revise a science unit, and write lessons plans. These were used by the entire 2nd/3rd grade team. Supportive Environment Maintaining support for a diverse school community has long been a core value for PS 3. Administrators have continued to remain in ongoing conversations with staff and with parent leaders about structures and decisions that affect the health and spirit of the school community. Their input is always factored into decisions. The Assistant Principal participated in District 2's AP Diversity Study Group. Classroom teachers used the books that had been acquired toward the end of the 2016-17 school year to support awareness of differences among people and perspectives. There was strong staff support for "Tutu Tuesday," during which many staff members wore gender non-traditional clothing. The PTA Diversity Committee allocated funds for each staff member to acquire both professional and classroom books that would help build understanding of issues surrounding differences, and provided a list of suggested readings. 2  Coherent Curriculum As we did last year, we again set the expectation that all teachers on a grade would use common curriculum. We supported this by providing professional time and additional coverage for each grade team to spend revising unit pacing calendars, and improving and elaborating on unit plans. Our key areas of focus for the coming year include: - Rigorous Instruction/ Collaborative Teachers: Continuing to refine and enrich our collaborative lesson plans. - Build teacher leadership by participating in the Collaborative Action Research Planning (CARP) initiative offered by the Office of Teaching and Learning. The teachers who participated in this past year's Data and Literacy PLO are members of the CARP team, as is the Math/Data Specialist. - Piloting the NGSS in 2nd/3rd grades using the Amplify science curriculum that integrates science and literacy. Working in other grades to begin to incorporate the NGSS and the official Science Scope and Sequence into curriculum and instruction. - Continue to refine our focus on phonemic awareness and letter-sound correspondence through the incorporation of Sounds Sensible and SPIRE programs, and by extending intervention to K students (funding permitting). - Rigorous Instruction/Supportive Environment: Continue with our goal in mathematics instruction of providing access to challenge for all students using Investigations supplemented by selected Context for Learning units and collaboratively made teacher materials, as well as Dreambox software in the 4th and 5th grades. - Rigorous Instruction/Supportive Environment: Continuing the work to build a culture of perseverance and higher expectations for their own work among students through using mistake-making as a path to learning, self-assessment and constructive peer feedback. There was evidence of progress in these areas both in classroom observations and in student attitudes towards challenging assessment situation. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M003 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 753 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 18 17 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 50 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 21.0% % Attendance Rate 18.9% % Reduced Lunch 3.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 13.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 66.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.25 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 73.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 99% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 102 100 94.1% 1.7% 18.5% 5.7% 8.6% 5.2% 2 0% 7.4 77.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  Experienced teachers who are accustomed to creating and adapting curriculum  Many existing strong social studies units   Some existing strong science units Staff familiarity with a range of literacy approaches including workshop model and Orton-Gillingham based programs to support students with a range of skills Integration of a range of technology resources  Data Sources:  Curriculum pacing calendars and unit plans developed by grade teams with coach support  Content area reading responses and writing samples, including both on-demand and published assessed using writing checklists adapted from Writing Pathways  Teacher-student conferences  New York State Standardized English Language Arts test   Classroom observations  Parent feedback Staff meetings to review work samples and conference notes Priority Needs: Implementing and assessing collaboratively developed unit plans.   Developing robust common assessments and using the results to revise curriculum and instructional strategies to ensure maximum student learning.  Continuing to collaboratively review student work samples using the lens of "What are the strengths? Where does the learning break down? What instructional strategies/interventions might address this?"  Continuing to build vertical integration. Part 2 – Annual Goal 5  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, using pacing calendars and curriculum units that integrate literacy with social studies and science will continue to improve the quality of student work in all these disciplines relative to the 2017-18 school year. This will be measured by student work samples, student performance on a range of formative and standardized assessments, and classroom observations. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Development, revision, and ongoing monitoring of pacing calendars and units of study that integrate literacy, social studies and science. Administrators, coaches, teacher teams. May 2018 through June 2019 Ongoing use of standard and formative assessments to monitor student work Collaborative assessment and revision of plans Administrators, coaches, teacher teams. July 2018 through June 2019 Administrators, coaches, teacher teams. September 2018 through May 2019 Administrators, coaches, teachers with special skills and expertise in these areas Administrators, coaches and teachers Administrators, coaches and teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will continue to hold classroom and grade level parent workshops to share this approach to curriculum, as well as its specific components, and to explore how families can support student learning. These will be conducted starting with Curriculum Night in September, and will be followed by parent workshops on different grade levels in October through June (Preventing "Summer Slide"). They will be organized by our Parent Coordinator in collaboration with our teaching staff, related service providers, administration, and community partners. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: Administrators, general and special education and ENL teachers, parent coordinator. Instructional resources: Teachers College Units of Study for the Teaching of Reading and Units of Study in Opinion, Information, and Narrative Writing, Writing Pathways, Facing History, primary sources both historical and current, local museums and historical sites, NYC Science Scope and Sequence. Scheduling: Work was done during Monday professional time and on planning days in May and June. Selected Monday and/or Tuesday professional work time will be committed to working toward this goal. Budget permitting, 7  this will be supplemented with teacher per session work. Teachers will be covered so that they can attend PLOs and conduct parent workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Weekly meetings of instructional team to monitor progress. Selected Monday and Tuesday professional work time from September through May will be devoted to grade team continued development and revision of units of study and collaborative examination of student work. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Standards based teacher-made rubrics and checklists to assess student writing and other work products, checklists from Writing Pathways, Teachers' College reading assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Data Sources: ● Student work samples ● Staff-student interactions ● Assessments from Investigations curriculum and Early Childhood Assessment of Mathematics (ECAM) ● Teacher-made formative assessments in writing and mathematics ● Feedback from reviews of principal and school ● Student work on New York State Standardized tests ● Classroom observations Strengths:  Opportunities for students to develop positive attitudes about mistakes as opportunities for learning  Differentiation of instruction  High teacher expectations of themselves and of students  Flexible thinking and non-hierarchical attitude of the majority of staff members; this informs their willingness to work with students to the best of their ability, regardless of the staff members title within the school  Ability of teaching staff to synthesize elements of multiple curricula to support student learning Needs:  To continue to increase students’ perseverance, expectations for their own work, and self-monitoring  To develop common structures and instructional practices across grades that build through the grades that facilitate these attitudes and behaviors  To continue to communicate these attitudes and behaviors to families  To develop clear structures and pathways of referral in working with students whose self-regulation impedes their classmates' right to a safe and peaceful learning environment 9  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Our goal is to continue to build a culture of perseverance, high student expectations for their own work, and greater self-monitoring. The quality of student work and attitudes toward revisions and perseverance will be assessed using classroom observations and student work samples, and a range of standard and formative assessments, comparing progress from September to June. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will continue to differentiate and scaffold standards-based assignments to provide all students with access and appropriate challenge. The goal will be to deepen student understanding of how to achieve continuous improvement and personal best, This inclusive goal crystallizes the expectation that all students, including ENLs and students with disabilities (SWDs) can improve their work. It taps into a range of student strengths including academic, artistic and social talents. There will continue to be an explicit effort to ensure that paraprofessional staff members clearly understand how to support this goal. This goal will be specifically addressed at parent curriculum workshops. It will also be periodically discussed in the Principal's report at PTA meetings and at SLT meetings. Parents of students in grades K-5 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students in grades PK - 5 September 2018 through June 2019 All instructional staff Paraprofessionals September Administrators, all teaching and instructional support staff Administrators, instructional staff 2018 through June 2019 September 2017 through June 2018 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. This goal will be specifically addressed at parent curriculum workshops. It will also be periodically discussed in the Principal's report at PTA meetings and at SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: Administrators, coach, classroom teachers. 1  Scheduling adjustments: Teachers will continue to be supported in observing their colleagues to better understand effective strategies for maximizing time and encouraging student perseverance and useful peer feedback in order to build high student expectations for their own work. Instructional resources: Shared assessments, checklists and rubrics for use by both teachers in assessing students and by students in self and peer assessment. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The changes in the quality of student work and attitudes toward revisions and perseverance will be assessed using classroom observations and by using student work samples. Progress will be compared from September baselines with parallel work samples and peer feedback samples from February. Common school-made rubrics and checklists will be used. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student attitudes toward challenging tasks as observed by teachers, coaches and administrators, student work samples assessed with grade-wide checklists and rubrics, student feedback to their peers, and student performance on a range of formative and standard assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data Sources:  Collaboratively constructed pacing calendars and curriculum  Teacher-made standards based assessments in mathematics   Coach and administrator observation  Parent feedback Student on demand writing samples New York State standardized tests Strengths:  Teachers are eager to grow professionally and pursue PLOs in literacy and mathematics  Teachers ground their instruction in research-based curricula such as Investigations, Context for Learning, Teachers College Reading and Writing Units, Fundations and SPIRE.  Teachers are reflective and invested in improving their practice. They research resources and share these with each other on an ongoing basis.  The overall school environment is deliberately cooperative not competitive. Teachers rotate and share leadership roles. Successes are celebrated and continuous growth is the norm. Needs:  To continue to engage in cross-grade examination of curricula to ensure that it forms a continuum from Pre-Kindergarten through fifth grade.  To increase teacher collaboration on strategies for ensuring that all students have access and challenge throughout the subjects  To increase teacher collaboration on strategies for supporting students who struggle with self-regulation on becoming better able to maintain school-appropriate behavior.  To ensure that families understand the current expectations for student work and the strategies that are being used to support students in achieving these. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 3  By June 2019, teachers will have built on the work done in the 2018-19 school year to take leadership roles in improving student performance academically, as measured by common formative and standard assessments. By June 2019, teacher teams will have developed shared procedures for effective intervention and collaborative support for students who have been identified as having difficulty self-regulating, as measured by an increase in the time spent in school-appropriate behaviors among these students. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will continue to examine their units in relation to expected student learning outcomes. Grade teams will adjust their curricula based on student performance on unit assessments in order to ensure that both concepts and skills are developed as students progress up the grades. All students PK- 5th grade Teachers will consistently use the pacing calendars and unit plans collaboratively developed by grade teams. If needs for revision and/or adjustment become apparent, these will be done collaboratively by the team. All students PK- 5th grade Teacher teams will incorporate strategies and materials to support students with disabilities (SWD), English Language Learners and academically gifted students . SWDs, ELLs, academically gifted students September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 Teachers will attend PLOs provided by Math in the City, Everybody Reads, the Manhattan Field Support Center in cooperation with District Two, and the New York City Department of Education. All students, student sub-groups Summer 2017 through May 2018 Staff will participate in the CARP project facilitated by the Office of Teaching and Learning in cooperation with the Field Support Centers to examine data in order identify a problem of practice/area of growth and to devise and refine strategies to address it. Dependent upon problem identified June 2018 through June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administrators, all instructional staff Administrators, all instructional staff Administrators, instructional staff, including ENL, SETSS and IEP, Speech and Language teachers, Occupational and Physical Therapists Administrators, instructional staff, including ENL, SETSS and IEP, Speech and Language teachers, Occupational and Physical Therapists Assistant principal, math coach, selected classroom teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At Curriculum Night in September, the expectations and curriculum will be introduced. There will be classroom and grade level parent workshops to share strategies that can be used at home to support students' throughout the year. 5  Teachers will send out regular communications about class work and events to families. The Parent Coordinator will send out a weekly e-newsletter to families. In addition to scheduled Parent-Teacher Conferences, teachers will be available for parent meetings on Tuesday afternoons, and if parents are not available then, at individually scheduled meetings before or after school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: Administrators, instructional staff, including ENL, SETSS and IEP, Speech and Language teachers, Occupational and Physical Therapists Instructional resources: In addition to the regular curricular resources of books, workbooks and math maniupulatives, technological supports including an interactive white board and document camera for each classroom, shared Chromebooks and iPads, software including but not limited to Bookflix, Co-writer, and Dreambox. Scheduling: Selected Monday and/or Tuesday professional work time will be committed to working toward this goal. Budget permitting, this will be supplemented with teacher per session work. Teachers will be covered so that they can conduct parent workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Common assessments will be given regularly including Teachers College Reading Assessment, on-demand writing assessments, unit and teacher-made math assessments, and collection of work samples. Anecdotals of student interactions and behavior will be maintained as appropriate. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In addition to the above-cited instruments, teacher teams have develped standards-based rubrics to be used in grading for report cards. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Please note: The current principal is retiring and a new principal will be in place for the 2018-19 school year. It is therefore difficult to accurately complete this section at this time. Each year, teachers have the opportunity to attend professional development workshops in a range of areas including academic subjects, behavior management and the arts. Some of these are at the suggestion of administrators; others are by teacher choice. School wide professional work has consisted of sharing expertise and effective practices among teachers. Strengths:  The majority of the teachers are proactive in seeking opportunities for professional growth.  The administration is responsive to teacher requests if they are at all feasible.  There are many experienced teachers on staff who are willing and able to share their areas of expertise with  colleagues. In the 2017-18 school year, a number of staff members took initiative to facilitate professional learning activities with the staff.  There is increasing interest in peer facilitation among the staff. The AP has been trained in Facilitative Leadership at NYU Metro Center. Two teachers are planning to attend the training this summer, and it is likely that one or two others will attend this fall. Needs:  Dedicated time for teachers who attend outside professional workshops to share what they have learned with their colleagues in a timely fashion. Specific follow-up monitoring to ascertain the impact of professional work on student learning.   More regular targeted professional development for paraprofessionals.  Structure for staff (including non-instructional membres) to share their individual experiences and histories (racial, ethnic, cultural, gender, learning) with colleagues in a non-judgmental context to increase the staff's collective understanding of each other and of our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 7  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By September 2018, PS 3 will develop a draft professional learning calendar that takes into account both the expressed learning goals of staff members and the stated goals and action plans of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP), and schedule professional time to address these. It will include structured follow-up to monitor the impact of professional learning on student work. There will be a midyear check-in with key staff members in February, and a review of the year's professional development activities in June. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  A professional learning calendar will be created in the summer of 2018 in consultation with key staff members that takes into account observed needs, staff requests, CEP goals and the CARP initiative. It will include strands to address academics, working students with a range of special needs, working with diverse populations, and targeted professional work for paraprofessionals. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administrators, all members of teaching and support staff June through August 2018 Outgoing principal, incoming principal, AP, CARP team members The PD committee will meet to discuss and make any necessary revisions to the Monday calendar. Staff February 2018 Principal, AP, CARP team members, UFT Chapter Leader 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The nature and results of the school's professional work will be shared by administrators at the SLT meetings, with the PTA executive board, and at PTA meetings. This is especially relevant, as the PTA is continuing to fund our professional activities at a higher level than in any previous year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: Outgoing principal, incoming principal, CARP team, UFT Chapter Leader. Planning during the summer will be done through direct and electronic communication. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded X In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 9  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. There will be continuous monitoring throughout the school year, especially in relation to the work of the CARP initiative, and in preparation for report cards and parent-teacher conferences. In February 2019, we will review the impact of the professional work on student learning, as evidenced by student work samples and classroom assessments. At the discretion of the incoming principal, the staff feedback will be requested in June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.       Staff team meetings and notes, staff attendance at outside PLOs, staff facilitated PLOs for peers and staff responses to these peer learning opportunities, changes in instructional strategies as a result of PLOs, changes in student growth/work in response to staff professional work, functionality and impact of CARP team. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Information sources: Ongoing formal and informal feedback to Parent-Teachers’ Association (PTA) and School Leadership Team (SLT) members, teachers and administrators, family participation in school events and parent workshops, support for school partnerships with local cultural and educational institutions such as the New York Public Library, New York University, and the Whitney Museum. Strengths: ● Strong participation of families in virtually all aspects of the life of the school. ● Active PTA with tireless and constructive leadership and many committees, including a strong Class Parents committee. ● Many parent volunteers in classrooms, lunchroom, at recess, and for special events, both fund raising and “fun” events. ● Regularly maintained school website with events and information posted, as well as regular informational emails. ● Weekly class newsletters from teachers to students’ families, either by email or backpack mail. ● Ongoing communication between administrators and parent leaders. ● Engaged and energetic SLT. ● Parent drop-off and pick-up of Pre-Kindergarten through first grade students in classrooms, and regular parent events in second through fifth grade classrooms. ● Genuine interest in and commitment to communication among parents, teachers and administrators. ● Partnerships with outside organizations including cultural institutions and educational and charitable organizations. Needs: ● Continued subject specific parent workshops early in the school year (addressed in previous goals). ● Detailed information for all families about the programs that are available both within and outside the school to support students with special needs. 1  Expanding the sense of connection to the school to a broader set of parents. ● Cultivating a strong community of caring and attunement to the issues that negatively impact the lives of students and their families including but not limited to poverty, racism, and immigration status. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To expand the sense of connection to the school community to a broader set of parents. While the PTA, administration and school staff make a concerted effort to be inclusive and inviting, to do specific outreach to all families, and to offer a range of opportunities for participation, only a percentage of families become actively involved in the ongoing life of the school. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Create a grade wide schedule of in-classroom drop-off for grades 2 through 5 so that parents can plan these visits into their schedules. While all families are periodically invited into classrooms for publishing parties and events, and are invited to some classrooms on a weekly basis, this is not consistent throughout the middle and upper grades. (It is not an issue in PK/K/1st grade because families are invited to drop off in the classroom every day. Families of students in grades 2 through 5. October 2018 through June 2019 Administrators, Parent Coordinator, Teachers in grades 2 through 5. Schedule two annual "coffee with the principal" meetings for each grade band (K/1, 2/3, 4/5), an increase from previous years. Parents/guardians of all students. Schedule more teacher presentations at the PTA meeting to draw more parents/guardians to attend. Parents/guardians of all students Assess staff interest in forming a study group to examine the impact of issues of race, class, and learning ability on families' experience of the school community and how these may be addressed. School administration and staff October 2018 through April 2019 October 2018 through May 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator School Staff School administration, Parent Coordinator, selected staff members 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. New York University Metro Center Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 3  Human resources: Parent coordinator, School administration and staff, PTA executive board, Class parent committee, communication committee Instructional resources and scheduling to be determined based on assessed needs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded X In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. There will be a conversation midyear among the Administrators, Parent Coordinator, and PTA executive board to assess progress toward meeting this goal as made evident by the degree of active family participation in school community events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data about the amount and degree of family participation in PTA meetings, fund raisers, "funraisers," and classroom events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Multiple measures including independent reading level (Teachers College reading assessment), Fundations/Wilson assessments, teacher made assessments, class work and home work Investigations unit assessments, teacher made assessments, class work and home work Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, with occasional one-to-one Mostly during school day, a little after school Fourth grade tutorial program in mid-size group Tutorial program is after school During school day Tutorial program is after school Small group or partnership, occasional one-to-one Fourthtutorial program in mid-size group Guided reading groups in classroom, small Fundations-based and SPIRE-based reading groups with IEP teacher, template scaffolds for writing, Co-writer software, small group work with paraprofessional or assistant teacher, at-risk small group work with SETSS teacher, fourth and fifth grade tutorial program Re-teaching using alternative strategy or model, scaffolding using tangible materials, repeated opportunities to practice, peer tutoring, small group work with F-status intervention teacher, fourthgrade tutorial program, use ofDreambox software to provide incividualized instruction and practice in the upper grades 5 Small group or partnership During school day Small group or partnership During school day Mostly small group, some individual During school day Science Social Studies Student class work and homework, class participation Student class work and homework, class participation At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Student behavior in school, student request, family request Re-teaching, use of visual supports, vocabulary supports, scaffolding templates, peer tutoring Re-teaching, use of visual supports, vocabulary supports, scaffolding templates, peer tutoring Small play groups with guidance counselor, individual counseling with guidance counselor, school psychologist or social worker, behavior plans with support of school psychologist or IEP teacher 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A - we are not a Title 1 school. N/A - we are not a Title 1 school. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We currently have no Students in Temporary Housing. We have six students who are doubled up. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7 We begin by having support staff do outreach to the family to assess their needs and struggles. Staff members involved include our guidance counselor, parent coordinator, school secretary, administrators and classroom teachers. Staff worsk to connect families with social service organizations that can help them locate affordable housing. On the basis of the information we receive, the STH funding is used for a combination of: school supplies, books and clothing. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 8,014 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). n/a Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 9  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 0  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Charrette School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The Charrette School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 3  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Charrette School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 4  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 5  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) (Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs;) II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 6  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 7  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name Charrette School Borough Manhattan School Number 003 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Lisa Siegman Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Anna Wlodarczyk Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Mirza Silva/ASD Coordinator Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Bonnie Laboy Assistant Principal Regina Chiou Coach type here School Counselor Parent TBD Parent Coordinator Carrie Reynolds Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Broughton Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 9  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 725 Total number of ELLs 29 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.00% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use the TCRWP to assess students' reading comprehension and fluency . This is administered five times per year. Teachers create and administer regular on-demand writing, and content area tests that they use as formative assessments to guide instruction throughout the unit. Spelling and vocabulary quizes, and exit tickets are used to assess knwoledg and skills daily and weekly. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have a number of support staff that help teachers to write quality, standards-based assessments. Our math and reading coaches help teachers align assessments to unit goals as well as Common Core standards in math and literacy. The teachers along with the coaches anlyze assessment data and plan differentiated instruction accordingly. 0  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use the TCRWP to assess student growth in reading at the end of the year. We also use teacher created assessments such as tests and performance tasks in content areas that are given at the beginning and end of units. We use a benchmark assessment in math that is given at the beginning of the school year, and once again at the end of the school year to gauge student growth. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers and co-teaching teams analyse data and use that information to restructure small groups in reading, and math. Additionally, teachers utilize paraprofessionals, and teacher aides to work with those students who need additional interventions or enrichment. We find these types of interventions, delivered to small groups made up of mostly homogeneous learners are most effective for structuring effective learning experiences. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We use data to provide increasingly intensive, targeted instruction designed to match the learning needs of students. We do this with the understanding that second langauge acquisiton and academic learning overlap but also differ from each other. We examine how ELLs’ backgrounds such as first and second language proficiency, educational attainment, immigration, socioeconomic status, and culture play a role in the academic learning. With that in mind, we follow the 4 action steps of a quality RTI model: screening as early as enrollment, strong core instruction, intensive tailored instruction and progress monitoring. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We primarily use the NYSITELL anad NYSESLAT assessments to evaluate and inform ELL programs. Additionally, we use the EDAT tool to further inform our ENL program as well as any additional intervention or enrichment programs/activities that we see as necessary. We also use the ELA and Math exams when considering class placement. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL teacher analyzes the data and forms pull-out groups. Additionally, this data is considered in grade cluster meetings when creating class placements for the following year, as well as during meetings the ENL teacher has with classroom teachers. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction in the Freestanding program is delivered by proficiency and grade level. Students who scored at the beginning or emerging level on the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT receive 360 minutes of ENL/ELA instruction per week in a pull-out setting. Students who scored at the transitioning or expanding level on the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT receive 180 minutes of ENL/ELA instruction in a pull-out setting. Students who have scored commanding (tested out of ENL) on the NYSESLAT receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction per week in the classroom during ELA and other content areas. b. TBE program. If applicable. 1  N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teacher arranges groups based on proficiency level and the grade students are in. This ensures that students’ linguistic and academic needs are appropriately met. Scheduling is done in collaboration with classroom teachers to confirm students do not miss vital elements of classroom instruction. Beginner and emerging students receive half of their ENL instruction along with peers who are more advanced in English. This allows them to listen to a more proficient speaker and practice speaking. The rest of the time is spent in a smaller group where instruction is more tailored to developing basic “survival” vocabulary that helps children become more independent from the start. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content areas are delivered by the classroom teachers and by the ENL teacher. In order to meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards, instruction focuses on providing ELLs with conceptual understanding and language competence. The ENL teacher concentrates on academic English, complex syntax and grammatical structures, language cohension, vocabulary, appropriate register, and sophisticated discourse. The language of instruction is English, but students are encouraged to use their home language to clarify and aid comprehension. The Freestanding ENL program is based on a balanced literacy approach. Students work with the ENL teacher on the same literacy skills and strategies their native-speaker peers work on in reading and writing. Students receive more extensive vocabulary instruction with additional scaffolds as needed such as front-loading of information, picture walks, translations of words, and directions in the native language, translated graphic organizers, visuals, language buddies, book pre-views in native language, bilingual dictionaries. The ENL teacher instructs teachers in how to uses the New Language Arts Progressions (available through Engage NY) to structure tasks and activities appropriate to each language proficiency level. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL’s are evaluated in their home language in several ways. Teachers use translation apps to make directions and tasks understandable, and students use translation apps to communicate in their home language. Teachers also use bilingual dictionaries, translated assessments and listen to students discuss concepts with each other using their home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status ESL instruction is tailored to student need based on prior life and literacy experience, home literacy, and any learning issues that a student may have as revealed during formal and informal assessments and observations. We are fortunate to be located near NYU, and as such, we receive a large number of student teachers from the School of Education and the Theater Education program, as well as America Reads/America Counts tutors. In addition, because we have a strong parent-backing for integrated arts curriculum, we receive PTA funding for Artists and Scientist in Residence who work in the classroom. We also participate in the Power Lunch Program. Cumulatively, this means that we have a number of educated and enthusiastic adults who are able to work one-on-one and in small groups with our students who need extra support. It also means that our ELL and students with special needs are given many opportunities for non-verbal communication and for negotiating the space between verbal and non-verbal communication. This takes place through music, dance, visual arts and theater projects and performances. 2  a. We currently have no SIFE students. However, if a SIFE student enrolled in the school, they would be given instruction at their grade level with any necessary supports. This would be highly individualized, and depend on the needs of the student. That student would get intervention instruction to try and bring them closer to grade level. A careful analysis of any prior educational experiences would enlighten what types of support available at the school can be employed (whether it is a special education teacher working along with the ENL teacher, a reading recovery specialist, etc.). Age would also be considered in grouping decisions. We would also consider which SIFE resources available on the DOE website (including the curriculum units) would best benefit our SIFE students, and implement those as needed. b. The needs of newcomers are as addressed above. Newcomers in the testing grades are given additional support during our extended day intervention period. Newcomers are given the preponderance of our attention, with extra community support for their families via the parent coordinator, PTA and ENL Coordinator to ensure that their home situations are as stable as possible. Because the majority of our ELLs are newcomers, they receive the greatest share of ESL attention and instruction. There is an initial focus on oral language and shared experiences and the language to articulate these. As students develop more facility with oral language, the focus shifts to the written word. Also, because most of our newcomers are in the lower grades, there is a built-in focus on language acquisition. c. For students whose proficiency level is developing, the focus has shifted to reading, writing, and especially academic language. The ENL teacher is providing scaffolds so they can interact with grade level content to the best of their ability. She is using graphic organizers, explicit strategy instruction, vocabulary building and graphic organizers to support their comprehension. To support student writing, the ENL teacher is focusing on supporting their organization using graphic organizers, acronyms, and journal writing. d. N/A We currently have no long-term ELLs since our students spend only about 6 years within the elementary school. Should we have any students who are long term ELL’, that would automatically mean they were retained in a grade at least once. Such students would receive additional support in the form of repeating a grade, as well as targeted ENL instruction in a small group setting. The ENL teacher would focus on what skills they are still missing, and work on those. e. Students who have exited the program continue to receive 90 minutes of support services in their classroom by the ENL teacher for two years after scoring ‘Commanding’ on the NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? PasTeachers who service ELL-SWD will use a lot of similar techniques that the ENL teacher uses. Research shows that many ESL methodologies work for struggling learners who are native English speakers. This includes vocabulary pre-view, visuals, repetition, structures to help organize ideas and writing (such as graphic organizers, sentence frames). The teacher may work with students on creating individual glossaries to help build vocabulary, and explicit strategy teaching. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school has a robust ICT program throughout the grades. This has proven especially effective in supporting ELLs with disabilities. Our staff takes a team approach, teachers and service providers who work with the same student meet regularly to assess the student’s progress and needs and adjust scheduling and curriculum accordingly. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELA intervention teachers work with students who need specific letter-sound correspondence practice using the Fundations/Wilson programs and with students who need to improve fluency with the Great Leaps program. Small guided reading groups are used in the lower grades and book clubs in the upper grades to help students develop their reading comprehension and inferencing skills. In all content areas, including Science and Social Studies, the emphasis is on the reading of informational texts. Students are asked to gather evidence and synthesize content. Their understanding is supported with word walls, word lists, and group work. Temporary guidance and scaffolding is provided by the teacher or a capable peer, with the goal of fostering the student’s ability to work toward independence. In writing, again in all content areas, the emphasis is on arguing, explaining and 3  informing. The ability to articulate a point of view, supported by evidence, is the goal. Math intervention is done primarily in the classroom, where teachers use a range of hands-on materials and graphic representations to support student learning. Teachers explicitly teach content-related vocabulary. Additional support is provided through 2nd through 5th grade small group math work and a 4th grade after school program. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We believe our current programs meet the needs of our ELLs. This year former ELLs will continue to receive services as mandated. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs will be discontinued at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students, regardless of their home language, participate in an instructional program of grade appropriate work in literacy, math, social studies, science and the arts. Students read in a range of genres for a variety of purposes. They build a shared knowledge of the topic through integrated curriculum and thematic teaching. Students are grouped homogeneously for language instruction. The small group instruction permits students to build community and create connections and permits teachers to differentiate instruction. Students think critically, solve problems and acquire language in the process. Small groups provide a safe environment for risk-taking as students speak and write about topics of interest. They have multiple opportunities for developing receptive and expressive language and a syntactical understanding of English at their proficiency level. Emergent speakers, readers and writers share in collaborative activities with fluent and proficient students, to the benefit of the whole community. Younger students write lists, letters, “all about” nonfiction books, observation and description, personal narratives and poetry. Older students write biographical narratives, expository non-fiction reports and persuasive pieces, in alignment with their grade curricula and the Common Core Learning Standards. All students develop technical proficiency within the computer lab, where they are able to work with a range of software to practice language skills and produce written work. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In order to support both our ELLs and our numerous students with learning differences and difficulties, classroom teachers make use of a number of multisensory cues, including visual aids such as pictures, graphic organizers, webs and timelines. In mathematics, there is fluid movement between manipulatives and more abstract representations of mathematical procedures and ideas. The ENL teacher/coordinator meets with teachers to discuss student process and strategies to support ELLs within the general education classroom. One subject that figures prominently in these conversations is the distinction between social language and academic language, and the increased cognitive demands that content specific language and syntax place on ELLs. Technology instruction includes the use of computers, digital cameras, LCD projectors, iPads, books on DVD and SMART Boards. All students receive technology instruction in the computer lab, ELL room, and have access to technology in their classrooms. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered by ESL teacher, other bilingual teachers and staff members, student peers and older students, and parent volunteers. Effort is made to stock classroom library in the ELL room to provide students with books in their home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Great care is taken to ensure that support is developmentally appropriate. Student learning needs are also taken into account. Students who are literate in their native language are grouped to support their transition into English, which tends to occur 4  more rapidly. Students who come from homes that are less literate are given more time, more general literacy work in small groups, and are given different, more supported activities even within a group. Students will commonly be given literacy materials and tasks that address a single subject but which are at different levels of language complexity. Since these factors can impact school success, student social and emotional needs are also considered, as is their family and home background. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? In order to support both our ELLs and our numerous students with learning differences and difficulties, classroom teachers make use of a number of multisensory cues, including visual aids such as pictures, graphic organizers, webs and timelines. In mathematics, there is fluid movement between manipulatives and more abstract representations of mathematical procedures and ideas. The ENL teacher/coordinator meets with teachers to discuss student process and strategies to support ELLs within the general education classroom. One subject that figures prominently in these conversations is the distinction between social language and academic language, and the increased cognitive demands that content specific language and syntax place on ELLs. Technology instruction includes the use of computers, digital cameras, LCD projectors, iPads, books on DVD and SMART Boards. All students receive technology instruction in the computer lab, ELL room, and have access to technology in their classrooms. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The PTA sends welcome packets to all known entering students including ELLs. The parent coordinator does outreach to families that enter throughout the school year. In addition, the ENL Coordinator may group students who speak the same language to be “buddies”, and students are encouraged to take ownership of their school community through bulletin board displays, community walks. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We have no language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A (no dual language program) Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development for all ELL personnel happens at staff and grade meetings and is integrated into study of differentiated literacy instruction for students with a range of abilities and special needs. The ENL teacher/coordinator, as well as bilingually licensed teachers, participate in these meetings and share their expertise for working with ELL students. Meeting agendas and notes are recorded. The ENL Teacher/Coordinator participates in professional development seminars and shares the information from those sessions with the school community. Professional development will concentrate on the supports and scaffolds ELLs need to attain the rigorous grade level Common Core standards. ELLs face the dual challenge of learning specific academic language while simultaneously acquiring academic 5  content skills through the language. They will be expected to write coherent narrative explanations of their thinking and to engage in arguments. They will need to demonstrate higher order thinking skills, conjecturing, arguing from evidence, and drawing conclusions. Our professional development will focus on ways to scaffold ELL students’ learning and strategies to foster their autonomy and independence. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Teaches in the 5th grade place special emphasis on oral presentations, writing and academic language in an effort to prepare all their students for middle school and to meet the Common Core Standards. We have few ELLs in the 5th grade, and their placement is clustered to facilitate 5th grade teachers working collaboratively with the ELL teacher to meet their specific needs. The guidance counselor, who is our Middle School Liaison, works with the ELL and classroom teachers to ensure that the middle school choices are appropriate ones, and that their families understand this process. The mandated number of hours of ESL trainings are done within grade level meetings and whole staff meetings during the course of the school year. These meetings are attended by all staff members including the parent coordinator, the guidance counselor, and administrators. Meeting agendas are maintained. Oct. 5 2:40- 4:00 Common Core and ELLs: Strategies for helping ELLs engage in close reading Nov. 23 2:40 - 4:00 PM Vocabulary development in content (science, social studies and arts focus) areas for ELLs Dec. 21 2:40- 4:00 PM Utilizing SIOP methods for general education teachers (How classroom teachers can modify their instruction for ELLs in ELA) Feb. 29 2:40- 4:00 PM Utilizing SIOP methods to teach math in a general education classroom April 4 2:40- 4:00 PM Assessing ELL's: Modifying assessments and arranging alternative assessments for ELLs Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? . The ENL teacher maintains correspondence with the families of ELL students. As per mandates, this year she will schedule an additional formal meeting with each student’s family. These meetings wills serve as follow-ups on things discussed during earlier PTA conferences, and/or other meetings. Progress towards goals, and additional goal setting will be the focus. Parents will be provided with data to evidence their child’s growth and areas for improvement. Parents will be notified of the meeting via letters, and phone calls, or emails if necessary. Meetings will take place between the first and second PTA conferences so parents can receive suggestions and strategies to actively help their child grow at home. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The school as a whole has an extraordinary amount of parent involvement, with parents participating in classroom projects, organizing and chaperoning field trips, special programs and events. The parents of ELL students are included in these activities through outreach by the ELL teacher/coordinator, the PTA and the Class Parents’ Committee. Parents are invited to come and visit the school, and if permissible, to participate and assist in the classroom. This helps improve the English skills of the parent as well. They assist the ELL teacher and, at the same time, improve their own English skills. Outreach is also done through the PTA Class Parents' Committee and the Parent Coordinator. Parents are involved in many PTA committees including the Arts Committee, Fundraising, Lunch/Recess and Class Parents Committee. They also sit on the board of “PS 3 til 6”, the after school program. 6  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. We have no further information at this time. 7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lisa Siegman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Charrette School School DBN: 02M003 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Lisa Siegman Title Principal Regina Chiou Assistant Principal Therese Spring-Robinson Parent Coordinator Anna Wlodarczyk ENL/Bilingual Teacher Lilia Alvarez Parent Susan Soler/ Kindergarten Teacher/Subject Area Mirza Silva/ASD coordinator Teacher/Subject Area Bonnie LaBoy Maria Broughton Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/30/15 10/30/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 9  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M003 School Name: Charrette School Superintendent: Bonnie LaBoy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 3 uses the Home language Identification Survey to decide in which language to send home information. Parents indicate at the bottom of page 2, under parent information, in which language they prefer to get oral and written information from the school. In addition, a school-made Parent Communication survey was distributed to classroom teachers to verify families' preferred languages of communication and the need for interpretation and translation. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 0 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The vast majority prefer English for both oral and written communication. The preferred languages for oral communication include Spanish, Italian and Korean. The preferred language for written communication other than English is Spanish. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. New family handbook, school calendar, parent-teacher conference announcements, after-school program information, New York State testing dates, letters from school leadership, overview of curriculum. The ENL teacher informs all staff about translation services as soon as school starts. Individual teachers begin considering their interpretation needs as soon as possible. All staff knows that there are times when the interpretation unit is busy (such as parent teacher conferences) therefore preparations for requesting interpreters start at least four weeks in advance. Any necessary translation requests that cannot be handled by in-house staff will be submitted two weeks prior to Curriculum Night on September 17 th , 2015 Parent Teacher 1  conferences on November 3 rd and 4 th , 2015 March 2 nd and 3 rd , 2016 and Parent Event on June 8 th , 2016. Any other individual requests that arise will be submitted two weeks prior to the event. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Formal meetings: curriculum night, parent-teacher conferences, middle school information meeting. Informal interactions: guidance counselor calls to parents, possible attendance meetings, possible calls for health or injury related issues. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We also make a concerted effort to place new students with families who prefer communication in a language other than English in a classroom where there is a staff member who is fluent in their preferred language. We also attempt 2  to cluster families that speak a language other than English, such as Italian, in a class where other families are fluent in the same language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our ENL teacher/coordinator and our classroom teachers will survey the families as to the quality and availability of services prior to November and April parent-teacher conferences. 3 
