2018-19 RISE SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (R-CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 01M015 School Name: P.S. 015 ROBERTO CLEMENTE Principal: IRENE SANCHEZ 2018-19 CEP-RISE 1  Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Rise School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Partnerships Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Roberto Clemente School 01M015 310100010015. PK-5 School Number (DBN): 333 East 4 th Street, New York, NY 10009 (212)228-8730 212-477-0931 Phone Number: Fax: Irene Sanchez Isanchez11@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Geographical District: 01 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Kathleen Shamwell Irene Sanchez Donna Fiscina JoiS. Gillespie Donna Fiscina Kizziah Knight District Information Carry Chan Superintendent: 166 Essex Street, New York, NY 10002 CChan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-353-2948 Phone Number: 212-353-2945 Fax: Manhattan FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Yuet Chu 2018-19 CEP-RISE 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7 th Avenue, 8 th floor, NY, NY 10001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective To guide, support and accelerate the early progress demonstrated by the schools graduating out of the Renewal program, as Rising Schools of Excellence (Rise), with a compelling theory of action, clear strategy for sustainment, targeted individualized supports, continued accountability, gradual release of responsibility, such that they independently accelerate their growth trajectory. Background Rise Schools have demonstrated: ● ● they have the will and conditions in place to accelerate student growth and meet school improvement benchmarks. they have the capacity to lead/implement a school improvement strategy. Rise Schools have seen some gains1 across multiple measures including graduation rates, college readiness, state test scores and attendance. As a result, these schools will fully transition out of the Renewal Schools program at the end of the 2017-2018 SY and continue under the guidance of the Office of Field Support, in partnership with the Office of School Support and Supervision. 1All Rise Schools met at least 67% of their benchmarks, are not on the State’s Priority list, and have demonstrated a sustainable school improvement structure that will allow them to build on their progress. Six Rise Keys for Continued Improvement 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. 4. Apply a tiered approach to student intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and Improve Data Driven Practices community partners Increase monitoring and accountability 6. Theory of Action If the NYC Department of Education provides customized supports to Rise schools and principals designed around the “Six Rise School Keys for continued improvement” then, Rise principals and their teams will have the tools and resources to accelerate outcomes for ALL students and increase students’ access to an excellent and equitable education. Structure of the Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Rise school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following: ● Rise Benchmarks: please refer to the 2018-19 Rise benchmarks provided to your school. ● Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and Rise through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Rise process. ● Setting mid-year point benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan. ● Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school. ● Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 5  ● Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students. ● Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and the R-CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 6  The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the American Institute of Research (AIR) Needs Assessment, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools – they call it a Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 2018-19 CEP-RISE 7  Districts must use the new tool; and districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Education Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:  a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 8 a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC)  It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the R-CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the R-CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for R-CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Rise school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Rise Key and the corresponding statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Discuss and respond to the guiding questions under each Framework element.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Rise Program Priorities Our Rise Theory of Action (page 4) is drawn from research1 on turnaround schools, the DOE Framework for Great Schools, DTSDE Tenets, and the Quality Review, which suggest that these key priorities have the greatest impact on student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 9  RISE Keys Priorities 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. Improve Data Driven Practices 4. Apply a tiered approach to school support and intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and community partners 6. Increase monitoring and accountability  A clear focus aligned to students’ instructional needs, including college and career readiness  Access to common, standards-based curricula for all students, including ELLs and SWDs  Explicit and intentional embedding of culturally responsive Instruction in all content areas  Formative and summative assessments for all students in all grades that are aligned to curricula and produce clear evidence of learning  Tiered approach to teacher professional learning opportunities.  Partnership with families to increase engagement in students’ academic success  Implementation of a coherent vision for school improvement - a vision for leading learning, leading people, leading schools and leading change  Development of a system to support distributive leadership and build the capacity and sustainability of teacher leaders through continuous improvement  Developing leadership competencies, specific to turnaround efforts, including leveraging multiple stakeholders, a commitment to student learning and a sustained pursuit of measurable progress. Strategic allocation of resources to support instructional and professional learning plans and family engagement in leadership opportunities Integrative use of formative and summative assessment tools and practices to target resources and support throughout the year to achieve academic priorities    Ongoing analyses of school-wide and student-level data and adjustments to curricular resources and instructional moves  Prioritization of the use of standards and data to inform teaching and learning    Implementation of a tiered intervention system that engages teacher teams in frequent cycles of progress monitoring and adjustments to address diverse student needs School establishes coherent system, adopted by all to ensure that interventions are effective, differentiated and timely Increased use of teacher teams’ data-driven practices to accelerate student achievement  Clear strategy that establishes social norms within the school community and promotes a culture for learning with clear and high expectations for all students, in partnership with CBOs.  The sustainability of an environment where students feel safe, connected and engaged through practices that are culturally relevant and build their scholarly identity  The development of a whole school approach, in partnership with families, with   specific attention to social, physical and behavioral environments Social emotional learning practices embedded in teaching and learning as aligned to the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional learning (CASEL) competencies and supported by CBOs. School leaders implement effective monitoring systems to ensure that instructional practices and interventions are monitored closely at the classroom, team, and school wide level  Establish effective teacher team practices that ensure teachers are accountable for data findings and set timely and appropriate interventions  Data analysis results in adjustments to the programs and priorities to better service   students Foster positive systems for accountability driven by reflection and action planning Support from district leaders to focus efforts toward results and problem solving actions that lead to turnaround success. 1. Darden/Curry PLE – Turnaround Leadership Competencies and Turnaround Action Shown to Influence Student Achievement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 10  Achievement Network – SY 18-19 Foundations Rubric COSEBOC Standards and Promising Practices for Schools Educating Boys of Color Harvard Graduate School of Education and Harvard Business School: Certificate in School Management and Leadership Learner-Centered Initiatives Multidimensional Principal Performance Rubric Monitoring and Accountability ● Rise schools will be monitored for implementation of the Rise Comprehensive Educational Plan (R+CEP) by Superintendents and Office of Field Support. ● Rise schools will be held accountable for making progress according to annual targets set by the Department of Education, as evidenced by their attainment of named benchmark scores for each annualized key metric. Schools not achieving annual targets by June 2019 are subject to additional oversight and consequences, to be determined at a later date. ● OFS will bring increased oversight and accountability by monitoring FSC supports to schools and ensure that these are aligned with the school’s instructional focus, student and teacher needs, and moving the school toward achieving interim goals. ● OSSS will monitor DSR oversight of all supports to Rise Schools. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 11  Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the R-CEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Irene Sanchez Donna Fiscina Jois. Gillespie Kizziah Knight Kathleen Shamwell Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 12  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Veronica Flores Cecil C. Louison Sydahne Bradge TamikaKelly Felix Therese Rice Melanie Holick Wesley Moody Jr. Laura Salmon La’Nette Murphy X X X X X X X Parent Parent Parent Parent Staff: Teacher Staff: Teacher Staff: Teacher Other Contributor: Other Contributor: Asst. Principal Other Contributor: Parent Coordinator Parent Staff: Teacher 2018-19 CEP-RISE 13  Section 4: Rise School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Rise school addressing the following and please use existing data, where applicable: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. 2. 3. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as partners in furthering student achievement 4. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and your Rise Benchmarks and indicate where this has been a challenge. 5. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. PS15 is a small school located on the Lower East Side offering both gifted and talented and Special Education programs. As a community we value learning and recognize that we learn best when . . .  We Know Each Other  We Model  We Create Opportunities  We Expect, Reflect. and Celebrate Our core values of Respect, Responsibility, Inquiry, Opportunity, and Community guide our actions and joins us together as we work toward common goals. Our vision is to create a dynamic, academically rigorous neighborhood school and to continue to build a community that values a creative, intellectually challenging, diverse and nurturing school culture. Students and faculty will inquire, explore and discover together, with delight in learning, in an atmosphere of respect and mutual trust. Our mission is to advance our students on their journey towards college and career readiness by fueling their drive to explore and learn about our world and connect to others. We strive to develop our students’ and our own inner resources of creativity and connection by: -Engaging in rigorous learning experiences. With the Common Core Learning Standards as a guide, we embrace intellectual challenges and develop an attitude of perseverance in problem-solving and academic growth. Our learning is infused with art, and students demonstrate their learning in many ways, with an ever-growing sense of agency. -Providing a safe and trustworthy environment. We are guided by an understanding of social-emotional literacy in our relationships and in our teaching. Within a reliable and consistent atmosphere, we develop an understanding of ourselves and our peers. We communicate and work together openly, honestly, and productively. We honor the experience and perspective of each individual, and seek to be responsive to his or her points of view and needs. -Using precise and multi-faceted data. We continually assess our students’ and our own learning using a variety of assessment instruments in order to craft meaningful goals and plans for growth and achievement. Effective leadership, undefined by positional hierarchy, extends beyond tasks and traditional roles to engage and appreciate all members of an interdependent community. Our faculty models collaboration and reflection through its practice. Families join with us as vital partners in growth. Together, we create a vibrant community where policies and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 14  practices are formed collaboratively and revisited continually to ensure that we are providing a dynamic, rigorous and motivating environment for all stakeholders in our school community. PS15 has excelled at creating and maintaining extensive partnerships to meet the diverse needs of our community. PS15 was awarded the AIDP/Community Schools grant which led to the establishment of a partnership with Pathways 2 Leadership which provides a full time social worker, 3 social work interns, a community school director, after school programming, Professional development to faculty, and comprehensive services to families and students. Our partners Creative Arts Agency, Change For Kids, Arts for All, Third Street Music Program and and many others provide academic enrichment through various art forms such as drama, dance, and music. In addition, students explore social studies content through the arts with Children’s Museum of Arts and Learning through an Expanded Arts Program. Our second graders participate in weekly swimming lessons through Asphalt Green’s Waterproofing program. Our partners also provide material goods such as classroom supplies, book bags to families in need, and an annual Thanksgiving dinner for families in temporary housing. PS 15 is home to many families who reside in temporary housing. While we have been able to provide an exceptional learning environment for our families, this concentration of students in temporary housing has significant implications for the school’s academic program. From year to year, our hard work in raising the level of students’ achievement is not captured in test scores, because students move on to permanent homes. Data shows that high rates of transience dramatically affect the school’s standardized exam scores. According to "The Atlas of Student Homelessness in New York City" 2015, “The math pass rate for homeless students was 17% in SY 2013–14, compared to 31% for housed students eligible for free lunch and 49% for housed students not eligible for free lunch. Thirteen percent of homeless students passed State ELA tests in SY 2013–14, compared to 25% of housed students eligible for free lunch and 43% of housed students not eligible for free lunch.” (pp. 36- 38) Homeless students (defined in this report as both students living in shelters and students who are “doubled up”) have significantly lower pass rates than students who are designated as free lunch eligible, but not in temporary housing. Of far more importance than these testing challenges is the academic needs they imply. Students who enter the school after first grade often arrive with conceptual misunderstandings from earlier in their school careers. Compromised attendance rates often exacerbate gaps in learning. Through intensive academic interventions, PS15 has been able to narrow the achievement gap. PS 15 remains dedicated to meeting the needs of students and families and works with urgency to provide them more secure futures. At the same time, there are signs the improvements of the last few years will change the school’s demographics. PS15’s successful opening of a Gifted and Talented program has attracted a larger base of permanent families. In addition, our families have supported our efforts through positive word of mouth and recommendations to friends neighbors leading toward a more balanced and diverse student population. During the 2017-2018 school year, our students in temporary housing percentage was reduced from 40% to 26%. Our academic, enrichment, and extracurricular offerings, coupled with the familial nature of our school environment demonstrate that we are on target for achieving our vision. We have seen consistent growth in many of the elements of the Framework for Great Schools. In our 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, PS 15 ratings outperformed the district and city average in all elements of the framework (Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Supportive Environment, Effective School Leadership, and Strong Family and Community Ties). We believe our current and future work will be to continue to build on this strong foundation to ensure that student deficits are reduced and PS 15 students acquire the skill set to be successful contributing members of society. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 15  In 2018-2019, we will implement the following broad school improvement strategies:  Continue to build upon our initiative to become a School-wide Enrichment Model school by implementing strategies for engaging all learners by identifying their talents, interests, and abilities, and leveraging these strengths to deepen learning.  Continue to engage in a school-wide focus on cognitive engagement of all students to ensure higher order thinking and ownership of learning.  Refine and implement Response to Intervention (RTI) strategies and tools to ensure student achievement.  Provide intensive and differentiated Professional Learning Opportunities (PLOs) for all staff to ensure effective pedagogy and content knowledge.  Continued Community School work to increase family engagement and meet the diverse needs of our families. As a result of this implementation, PS 15 will meet the following benchmarks by June 2018:  We will increase our overall attendance to 94.3%  We will achieve an Average Proficiency Rating of 2.73 on the NYS ELA Exam  We will achieve an Average Proficiency Rating of 2.88 on the NYS Math Exam 2018-19 CEP-RISE 16  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 01M015 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 190 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A 12 12 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 84.7% % Reduced Lunch 4.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 57.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.09 0% 18% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 67.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 83% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 57 56 12 93.8% 0.0% 23.7% 27.4% 10.5% 1.1% 2 5% 4.5 58.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 17  2018-19 CEP-RISE 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. (aligned to Rise Keys 2 and 6) Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. (aligned to Rise Key 3) The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. (aligned to Rise Keys 1 and 4) Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X n/a X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? PS 15 has aligned our curriculum to the CCLS and the instructional shifts. Teachers work collaboratively with each other, staff developers, and administration to ensure that the curriculum meets the CCLS expectations. We use various forms of data in continuous cycles of data analysis, action, and evaluation leading to refinement of the curriculum including modifications and adjustments to provide access to all. Our school-wide instructional focus for the past year has been student engagement as demonstrated by: 1) motivation and persistence, 2) self-assessment, goal setting and accountability, and 3) student interest. We have engaged in professional study of Universal Design for Learning (UDL) and how it supports cognitive engagement. As a result of this work, we have seen an increase in student achievement evidenced by a 34 % percent reduction of tier 2 and tier 3 students in reading and a 33% reduction of tier 2 and tier 3 students in math, as measured by the iReady Intervention Screener report. According to our 2016-2017 quality review findings:  School leaders and faculty strategically selected common curricula from kindergarten to grade five to ensure coherence and alignment to CCLS across grades and content areas. Teachers strategically integrate text-based 2018-19 CEP-RISE 19  answers and deep understanding into unit and lesson plans. Teachers across grades have incorporated opportunities for students to write about reading and develop a deeper understanding of math concepts. School leaders and faculty meet with ELA and math consultants regularly to ensure that curricula is aligned to CCLS and revise curricula based on student assessment data, student work samples and observations of instruction.  Teacher teams consistently analyze assessment data and student work for students on their grade, as well as, across grade levels during vertical team meetings. Teachers shared that team work has improved their practice, added new strategies to their daily instruction and provided opportunities to observe practices in action via inter-visitations. Our 2017-2018 School Survey reported:  100% of teachers say that it is clear how all of the programs offered are connected to their school's instructional vision  96% of teachers say that curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are well coordinated across different grade levels at their school.  96% of teachers say that teachers are actively trying to improve their teaching While our data shows that we are moving in the right direction, we still have a great deal of work ahead of us. During the 2017-2018 school year, 50.95% of students made greater than one year of progress in reading according to our Independent Reading Leveled Assessment (IRLA). Nevertheless, we still have 45% of students performing below grade level in reading and 49% performing below grade level in math. This data tells us that there is need to incorporate additional RTI interventions to ensure all students are at or above grade level. One of our core values is opportunity, which includes ensuring students have the experiences and the access to the curriculum needed to be successful. To this end, we intend to build upon our already strong data analysis and intervention strategies to find greater success. Therefore, during the 2018-2019 school year, PS 15 will refine and enhance our data analysis practices to include additional strategies and tools to gain a deeper understanding of student needs. The information will then be used to implement research based Response to Intervention (RTI) strategies leading to greater student achievement. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? Our instructional focus for the 2018-2019 school year will continue to center on cognitive engagement for all students by:  Effectively incorporating the UDL Guidelines into instruction  Effectively using data to respond to student needs  Utilizing research-based RTI strategies and materials to increase student achievement Our instructional focus will be promoted through professional development, accountability, and systems and structures to support implementation. Teachers will engage in various forms of professional development including but not limited to: coaching, workshops, participation in year-long professional learning communities, inter-visitations, and actionable feedback from peers and administration. Teachers will be held accountable for implementation through Advance 2018-19 CEP-RISE 20  evaluations, frequent walk-throughs, random collection of lesson plans, and classroom environment checklists that identify evidence of these practices. How will you implement a standards-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, including ELLs and SWDs? Our vision for rigorous instruction is defined by classrooms in which teachers are facilitators and students engage with high level content to become the owners of their own learning. To this end, PS15 will be implementing Teachers College Reading and Writing Project units of study in ELA and Investigations in Mathematics K-5 in order to ensure students are exposed to a rigorous CCLS-aligned curriculum. Recognizing that there will be adaptations needed, teachers will strategically review curriculum to ensure students have exposure and access to grade level expectations. Teachers will utilize Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI), Exemplars, and Context for Learning as supplemental resources to fill any identified program gaps and ensure attention to instructional shifts. Additionally, PS 15 will continue to utilize UDL guidelines when planning instruction to ensure that barriers are removed and all students have access to challenging content. What is your vision for ensuring that all student have access to rigorous coursework that moves them towards career and college readiness? How will you support the personal and academic skills, habits, and behaviors needed for students to be career and college ready? Our vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behavior to be college and career ready include offerings that address academic and social-emotional needs and talents and interests. PS 15 will implement CCLS-aligned curriculum that provides students with a solid foundation in content area learning and academic skill sets. Through our focus on cognitive engagement, students will develop the necessary skills to self-assess, reflect, and take ownership of their learning. As a School-wide Enrichment Model (SEM) school, students' talents and interests will be nurtured, cultivated, and utilized to achieve academic success. Students will learn to be questioners and researchers who use their knowledge to take action, bring about change, and affect the community around them. These lifelong skills will prepare them for college and beyond and are reflected in the heart of the Common Core shifts. How do you envision embedding the elements of culturally responsive instruction and how will you know that implementation is successful? Culturally responsive instruction is a holistic approach to learning consistent with UDL. Student choice and a classroom climate of respect and inclusion supports a wide range of cultural norms and communication styles. Tools for culturally responsive learning include: group and partner work, games, content expressed through story, relatable real-world context, and multiple means of expression and representation. These elements are embedded in our current curriculum and are inextricably linked to our instructional focus on cognitive engagement. In addition to the curricular supports for culturally responsive instruction, teachers will individualize learning experiences by using student profiles. Renzulli learning surveys will be administered to each student at the beginning of the year and will be available to revisit and generate throughout the year. The resulting profiles will detail each student’s preferred learning and instructional styles, preferred product types (representation of learning) and special interests and abilities. Survey results will inform teachers in creating groups and partnerships and modifying curriculum and pedagogy. As we monitor our progress in the element of student engagement, we will see evidence of impact in student motivation and ownership of learning leading to increased student achievement. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Comprehensive assessment will provide diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative data that is used by teachers and administrators to inform decision-making across the school. Classroom instruction is carefully designed using student assessment data. Curriculum is augmented and modified to support student access. Professional development 2018-19 CEP-RISE 21  is informed by school-wide data and supports teacher's use of data to inform instruction and develop practices aligned to the CCLS and individual student needs. PS 15 uses comprehensive suite of assessments. In ELA, formative and diagnostic assessments are embedded in the reading program and include running records, phonics and vocabulary assessments. Backwards planning establishes benchmarks for specific times of year. In writing, on-demands and TC rubrics provide formative data, and students are benchmarked three times per year using narrative on-demands. In math, summative data is provided through unit tests. Diagnostic testing in iReady provides benchmarks relative to grade-level expectations three times per year, and adaptive on-line assessments track progress. Unit pre-assessments provide formative data for instruction. There are several systems for sharing school-wide data. Visual data walls in the Principal's office show reading levels for every student in the school. The data is organized by RTI tiers, providing a snapshot of school-wide performance and at-a-glance information for action planning and other instructional decision-making. The weekly message provided to staff members includes visual comparisons of all classroom reading levels, reading progress, and reading volume. In this way, patterns and trends across the school are made visible so we can analyze the effectiveness of our decisions through impact on student achievement. How do you envision differentiating teacher professional learning opportunities to support instructional foci, meet students’ unique needs and advance culturally responsive education in your school? The Instructional Council will work to develop our PLO plan and include differentiated PLOs such as: PLCs, classroom inter-visitations, school inter-visitations, and book clubs. We will continue to partner with District 01 to enhance our understanding of Culturally Responsive Education (CRE) and best practices. In addition, individualized professional learning will target identified teacher needs based on Advance observations, school walk-throughs, and teacher’s self-identified needs. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, there will be a 35% decrease in the number of tier 3 and tier 2 students in reading and math as measured by the iReady diagnostic assessment. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Average ELA proficiency rating of 2.73 Average Math proficiency rating of 2.88 2018-19 CEP-RISE 22  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Provide Professional Development: Teachers Average ELA proficiency rating of 2.73 September 2018 Principal Asst. Principal - June 201 Average Math proficiency rating of 2.88 MFSC Instructional Coaches Metamorphosis consultants TCRWP consultants ARC consultants Teachers Students Average ELA proficiency rating of 2.73 September 2018 Administrators Special Education Liaison - June 2019 Special Education Teachers Average Math proficiency rating of 2.88 1. That deepens teacher understanding of the UDL Guidelines in the area of engagement 2. On targeted grade appropriate RTI strategies 3. On the use of data analysis protocols and techniques 1. 2. Implement Specially Designed Instruction (SDI) in all Integrated Co-teaching (ICT) classrooms Include SDI in student IEPs 3. Provide professional development on SDI to all ICT teachers.  UDL guidelines evident in instruction during observations  Participation in PD evidence through sign in sheets  Team meeting minutes evidence use of data analysis protocols    IEPs will include SDI Lesson plans will demonstrate SDI Students will demonstrate progress on assessments. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 23 Instructional Council School-wide Schedules will be created and posted. Students Average ELA proficiency rating of 2.73 Average Math proficiency rating of 2.88 October 2017 January 2018 May 2018 Teachers Average ELA proficiency rating of 2.73 Average Math proficiency rating of 2.88 October 2018 Administration RTI resource page will be created and maintained on school intranet site. Refine progress monitoring practices by  Re-evaluating our  data collection tools and revising and/or replacing where necessary creating schedules to ensure evaluation is completed during regular intervals Effectively communicate available school-based RTI models and strategies available and available outside resources to support students through:  The development of school-wide list of RTI supports that can be implemented in the classroom  The development of a resource page on our internal school website. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will:  Create parent newsletters (monthly)  Offer parent workshops during parent engagement time (monthly)  Provide clear models to develop parents grade level expectations ( 6-8 weeks by unit)  Provide families with additional tools and resources to use at home such has pictures of classroom charts, graphic organizers, etc. (6-8 weeks by unit) Administrators will: Schedule school-wide parent workshops (minimum quarterly) Send home school-wide newsletter (minimum quarterly)    Engage in Coffee and Conversation meetings to answer questions and clarify misunderstandings (monthly) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 24   Utilize online resources such as our school app and website to share instructional information with families and provide models. (on going) Parent Coordinator will:  Survey parents for questions about instruction Teach and support parents on the use of online resources Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Principal Assistant Principal Teachers Models teachers Instructional Council Per Session planning time Per Session - Extended Learning Professional development time Computers Office supplies (paper, pens, chart, markers, tape, etc.) Metamorphosis Consultants TCRWP Consultants American Reading Company consultant Leveled Literacy Intervention kits Guided Reading Materials Math Manipulatives for small groups Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century X C4E 2018-19 CEP-RISE 25  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, there will be 20% decrease in the number of Tier 2 and tier 3 students as measured by the iReady diagnostic assessment. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Framework iReady Diagnostic Assessment American Reading Company’s Independent Reading Leveled Assessment Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. (aligned to Rise Key 5) 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. (aligned to Rise Key 5) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X X X N/A 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? PS 15 has established a culture of trust, care, and collaboration that has helped create a familial feeling among all stakeholders. We believe in taking a ‘solutions-only’ approach to addressing the needs of the community. Through this focus, PS 15 has been able to develop and maintain many community partnerships that support and sustain social-emotional health and academic growth. At PS 15, all children are known well by multiple adults, and collaboration among staff ensures that social emotional supports are timely and effective as demonstrated in the following data: Our 2017-2018 school survey reported:  93% of families say that the principal at their school works hard to build trusting relationships with families like them.  94% of families say that they feel respected by the principal and that they trust the principal.  96% of teachers say that teachers help maintain discipline in the entire school, not just their classroom.  96% of teachers say that they design appropriate instruction that is matched to students' need (for example, English language learners (ELL) proficiency and students with disabilities).  2018-19 CEP-RISE 27  100% of teachers say that the principal encourages feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders.  92% of teachers say that they apply their knowledge of parents' various cultural backgrounds when collaborating with them regarding their child's educational progress.  96% of teachers say that adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior (by focusing their attention, controlling their emotions, or managing their thinking, behavior, and feelings).  100% of pre-k through 5 teachers say that students are safe in their class(es)  96% of teachers say that adults at their school help students develop the skills they need to complete challenging coursework despite obstacles  96% of teachers say that adults at their school tell their students they believe they can achieve high academic standards.  88% of teachers say that adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities. In addition, it was noted in our 2016-2017 Quality Review report that “School leaders and staff consistently communicate with families via telephone, text, and email to share learning expectations and offer support." Our school has committed to engaging whole families in order to ensure students’ academic, physical, social and emotional success. To accomplish this, PS 15 continues to make attendance a school wide priority. While we have seen positive gains in attendance, according to our NYC School survey report, 76% of teachers “say that students feel it is important to come to school everyday.” Our data has shown consistent improvements in attendance. in 2016 we had 76% of students with a attendance rate above 90%. In 2017, that number rose to 79%. For the 17-18 school year, it rose to 86%. While we are on track to ensuring all students are in school every day, we still have work to do. Through our work in supporting students and families, we have identified several challenges to strong attendance: Social-emotional learning needs Strong peer-to-peer relationships Family and home barriers     Medical needs PS 15 will continue to implement strategies to increase attendance with a focus on the above challenges. We will:  Strengthen supports for students through our partnership with Pathways 2 Leadership (P2L), Jewish Board of Family & Children’s Services, and Wediko.  Develop a common language and understanding of how stakeholders contribute in creating a school community   that is safe and conducive to learning. Strengthen teacher practices in trauma informed instruction and in understanding and meeting social-emotional needs. Strengthen our school environment with the introduction of core values and character building lessons that support healthy relationships and problem solving strategies. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 28   Utilize school partnerships to further connect families to available resources. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you, in partnership with each CBO and families, enact your vision? Our vision for a supportive environment is defined by a unified school culture and a learner centered approach that values student voice, meets the needs of students and families, and provides the necessary tools to successfully address social-emotional challenges. It is characterized by true collaboration among stakeholders and community partners. To this end, PS15 will continue to work diligently to get to know individual learners and provide targeted individualized instruction as well as support services to reduce or eliminate barriers to learning and support social/emotional growth. Our CBO, Pathways 2 Leadership (P2L), will collaborate on school-wide goals, engage in data analysis with school staff, and work together with PS 15 and our families to problem solve for students. They will combine their resources with the school’s resources to ensure students have extended learning opportunities, rich educational experiences, access to arts education, mental health services, and an environment where stakeholders feel valued and have access to a variety of services. We will cultivate student voice and leadership by encouraging discussion and placing a high value on student thinking and expression. We will emphasize curricular opportunities for students to share their learning with their peers. Teachers will engage in professional development on raising mental health awareness and responding to students' mental health needs. They will continue to receive professional development from CBO Wediko on understanding the impact of trauma, using appropriate tools and strategies for social-emotional and behavioral needs, and learning to implement self-care to ensure they can continue to be mentally, physically, and emotionally available to support students and families. PS 15 will continue to implement PBIS and refine our Emotional Literacy (EL) program to more consistently provide students with an opportunity to share and name their emotions as a first step in developing strategies to manage their emotions and make productive choices. Additionally, we will implement a character building initiative, through school-wide read alouds and discussions, to explore various characteristics that contribute to academic and life-long success. Rich discussions will lead to the creation of classroom charters (class norms) and set expectations for the type of environment that we value as a community. In addition, students will participate in P2L’s Upstander! program to develop awareness of how each individual can contribute to the school culture and work collaboratively to prevent bullying. New this year, PS 15 will introduce to all stakeholders our five Core Values: Respect, Responsibility, Inquiry, Opportunity, and Problem Solving. These core values, established through a process of community consensus, represent the school culture we are building together. Through the promotion of core values, we will develop a common language and common understanding as we contribute to a school community that is safe and conducive to learning. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 29  These strategies for developing a strong supportive environment will result in improved social emotional supports for students and families, a reduced number of chronically absent students, and a school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Describe your plan to implement a culture of trust and high expectations for teachers, students, families and community partners. In partnership with CBOs and families, we will cultivate a culture for learning with clear and high expectations for all students by: Promoting school-wide goals and themes centered on character building:  Each month, all classrooms will use the same touchstone read-aloud to explore a quality of character through discussion and reflection. The themes are: kindness, self-control, empathy, gratitude, problem-solving, respect, perseverance, responsibility, and joyfulness.  Parent involvement will include regular communication about each month’s theme, and opportunities to be interviewed about a related experience.  Professional development will precede each theme so that teachers can unpack the text and plan for meaningful discussion. Promoting school-wide goals and themes featuring on our Five Core Values: Respect, Responsibility, Inquiry, Opportunity, and Problem Solving:  The five core values will be made visible through home-school communications, school documents, and student artwork and writing In collaboration with our CBOs and P2L partnership, implementing classroom-based PBIS and emotional literacy:  Teachers and partners will work with students to develop social-emotional literacy through PBIS and the Ruler program.  PBIS structures such as check-in/check-out and school-wide expectations for behavior will be consistently implemented  Providing professional development for teachers on skills and strategies for social-emotional support  Working with students to develop pro-social skills and connect with peers Cultivating a learner-centered approach that is culturally responsive:  Student voice and student choice is embedded in curriculum and Urban Seekers  TC units of study provides students with the opportunity write about their experiences and share their   knowledge about various topics. Investigations Math supports the co-construction of new knowledge with peers. We will continue to supplement our curriculum with Context for Learning units which are designed to promote student ownership of their learning. School-wide Enrichment (Urban Seekers) prioritizes student-centered learning as groups of students come together to explore a topic of their choice and develop a project. Responding to needs of students and families by coordinating with partners to provide:  Clinical mental health services.  Mentors and counseling for students. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 30 Family access to art and cultural events.   Assistance in obtaining basic needs. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner Pathways 2 Leadership (P2L) Wediko P2L:Mental health services, extended school day, parent engagement. CBO Focus Wediko: Professional development for school staff on mental health best practices and student support services. Jewish Board Family and Children Services Clinical mental health services in school How will you, in partnership with your CBO, create a supportive and engaging environment for your students’ families? PS 15, in collaboration with P2L, will create a supportive and engaging environment for students by pooling our resources to provide students and families with supports targeted to their needs. P2L will employ a full time social worker who will coordinate with PS 15’s guidance counselor to ensure students’ needs are met. P2L will dedicate a portion of the Community Schools Mental Health allocation towards sub-contracted services from Wediko to support the development of classroom practices and targeted student interventions. Our Social-Emotional Learning RTI team will meet regularly to monitor student progress and offer timely support. In addition, P2L and PS15 will utilize AmeriCorps Volunteers along with staff members to engage families in school events and activities. Together, we will implement celebratory practices that ensure families feel welcome and recognize that their thoughts and contributions are honored. Community School Forum feedback from families will be used for planning, support, and engagement. P2L will provide an engaging after school program for students and will work with our guidance counselors to provide families with needed referrals. We will partner with the Office of Community Schools to provide students with vision care and with outside organizations to meet other needs such as dental care. Through our concerted efforts, student and family needs can be addressed so that students will be open to learning and enjoying in an academically and socially rich environment. What essential questions, or key themes, will be explored by all staff and students that acknowledge and celebrate the culture and heritage of the student body? Across all grade levels, we explore culture and heritage through social studies curriculum and literature:  How are people, families and communities the same and different?  Why are families and communities important and how do they influence who we are?  How and why do families and communities grow and change over time?  How are world communities the same and different?  What makes a complex society? Central to this exploration is the belief that it is important to appreciate our own culture and heritage and to appreciate other families’ culture and heritage. Our diverse community will celebrate together in our annual Multicultural Dinner. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 31  Families and staff members cook and share dishes to learn about and appreciate each others' traditions and culture. As part of our Core Values initiative, we will acknowledge and celebrate our diverse cultures through the lenses of Community, Inquiry, and Respect. What evidence will you use to gauge the impact of your plan to create a positive school environment? We will utilize student attendance rates and the results from the annual NYC School survey to determine the impact our plan has had on creating a positive school environment. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, there will be an increase in attendance to an average of 94.3% by strategically implementing targeted physical and mental health interventions and character building initiatives that strengthen the school environment. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? Attendance: 94.3% 2018-19 CEP-RISE 32  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Students whose social-emotional needs are identified as tier 2 or tier 3. Attendance: 94.3% Monthly from September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Community School Director, P2L Executive Director, P2L social worker, school guidance counselors How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) A decrease in the number of behavioral incidents reported in SWISS. Utilize PBIS data to track student progress, implement supports, and measure social-emotional needs. During Tiered support meetings data will be analyzed and physical, emotional and mental health interventions will be implemented. We will communicate interventions effectively to all stakeholders Implement school-wide character building lessons based on selected books to:  strengthen individual character  Create a common language about behavior and interactions within the community Families, students, and School Staff Attendance: 94.3% September 2017 Principal, teachers, P2L, guidance counselors Increased attendance rates Weekly in-class character lessons At least quarterly from October 2018 - June 2019 2018-19 CEP-RISE 33 Attendance: 94.3% Monthly from September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, school attendance committee members, P2L, guidance counselors Improved attendance for chronically absent students Attendance: 94.3% Monthly Administration, teachers Core values from September 2018 - June 2019 will be visible in the school to all families and students. Students at risk of attendance below 90%, families of students at risk of attendance below 90% We will continue to monitor attendance data by: 1. Meeting regularly with the attendance team to analyze student attendance data. 2. Providing families with monthly attendance reports so that they can monitor their child’s attendance. 3. Reviewing attendance records for accuracy and make corrections when necessary. 4. Assigning interventions for families with attendance below 90% Students, families Communicate PS 15’s Core Values of Respect, Responsibility, Problem Solving, Inquiry, and Opportunity to all stakeholders and provide multiple opportunities to discuss, question, and consider our impact on the community through the lens of these values. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Multiple strategies will be utilized to engage parents/ families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child.  Parent engagement workshops will be held by classrooms teachers to introduce parents/ families to the Character Building topics students will be learning in class and strategies for supporting them at home. (Monthly) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 34   In collaboration with P2L and Wediko, we will provide parenting workshops on trauma, conflict resolution, and the importance of strong attendance. (Quarterly)  Monthly coffee and conversation meetings with the principal will cover a range of supportive environment topics. (Last Friday of every month)  Mental health professionals, teachers, guidance counselors, and the Parent Coordinator will conduct individualized outreach to families. (on-going)  Teachers will engage in home visits to build relationships and ensure students and families have the supports they need. (August - October 2018)  Teachers will provide periodic updates on student achievement through interim progress reports, sharing of assessment results, including tri-annual iReady assessments. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Wediko consultants P2L (Community School Partner) Weekly meeting time Guidance counselor Attendance Committee (School aide, teachers, P2L, administration, parent coordinator, school nurse) 504 forms Per session for home visits Jewish Board Mental Health services Parent Coordinator New Visions Data Sorter and Heat Map Character building books General supplies (paper, pens, post-its, etc.) Swiss online platform Printing costs for character building and core values posters for communicating with families Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 CEP-RISE 35  Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, our average attendance percentage will be at least 94.1% as measured by ATS attendance reports. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Daily attendance records ATS system Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. (aligned to Rise Key 2) 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). (aligned to Rise Key 3) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed n/a X n/a X 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? As a school, we have studied the concept of constructive struggle and the balance between too few and too many scaffolds in relation to Danielson domain 3C, Engaging Students in Learning. We believe that in order to raise student achievement, we must develop students' sense of ownership in learning, and establish a strong expectation that students will actively and persistently problem-solve with independence and investment. Our 2017-2018 School Survey show room for improvement in areas that reflect student investment in academic achievement:  81% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the students in their classes feel it is important to pay attention in class  76% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the students in their classes feel that doing homework is important  81% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the students in their classes try hard to get good grades In order to foster student participation in their own learning process, we must continue to implement research-based practices to increase cognitive engagement. To this end, we will leverage our strength in the Collaborative Teachers category through Professional Learning Communities (PLCs). 2018-19 CEP-RISE 37  The NYC School Survey data reports that PS15 is above the district and citywide average in every Collaborative Teachers category (cultural awareness and inclusive classroom instruction; innovation and collective responsibility; peer collaboration; quality of professional development; and school commitment). The 2017-2018 School Survey shows a significant strength in the area of Innovation and Collective Responsibility:  96% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the teachers help maintain discipline in the entire school, not just their classroom.  96% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the teachers are actively trying to improve their teaching  96% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the teachers take responsibility for improving the school  88% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the teachers are eager to try new ideas  92% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the teachers feel responsible that all students learn. The positive response in this area exceeds the citywide average by 11%. The area of Peer Collaboration, also at strength at 95% positive, exceeded the citywide average by a smaller margin of 4%. Ninety-two percent of teachers reported that teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels. The strength in Innovation and Responsibility coupled with the strength in Peer Collaboration, indicates that Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) will be a particularly effective means to improving practice across the school. Vertical teacher teams will capitalize on the opportunity to collaborate across grade levels. In PLCs, teachers will work together to research and implement practices related to student engagement and independence. During the 2018-2019 school year, teachers will add to their PLC study of engagement by including a look at strong practices that support self-assessment. By refining our self-assessment practices, we can increase student ownership for learning leading to increased cognitive engagement and student achievement. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? Our vision for Collaborative Teachers reflects the genuine, deep collaboration that exists among faculty. Faculty members expect to support each other. We are a community that values continuous learning. Educators work together to develop a thorough understanding of content, effective pedagogical practices, and supports for individual learning needs. Through this collaboration, teachers enhance their practice, take ownership for the success of all students, and ensure the development of life-long learners. To realize this vision, leadership has developed structures to accommodate collaboration in all aspects of professional practice. Structures include: weekly common planning periods for grade teams to analyze student data and create action plans; weekly extended professional learning times for vertical study groups, PLCs, and curriculum refinement; and a calendar of open inter-visitation periods with classroom coverage to allow for peer observation and feedback. Monthly special education teacher team meetings bring all grades together to explore effective scaffolds and extensions to CCLS-aligned curriculum, addressing the specific needs of learners. During Initial Planning Conferences, teachers and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 38  administrators select professional goals to guide their work. Teachers are organized into cohorts according to their professional goals and cohorts are shared amongst all teachers to ensure ownership, collaboration, and peer support in practice. Differentiated professional development is provided by consultants and administration based on identified and self-selected professional goals. Across the school, consistent teaching practices reflect what we understand about how children learn best, which includes: getting to know students, modeling for students, creating opportunities for students to problem solve and to apply what they’ve learned. We set high expectations, reflect on our practice, and take time to celebrate students. In all classrooms, teachers work individually and in small groups with students. They collect anecdotal notes during conferences and small group instruction and set individualized student goals. Teachers teach into and monitor student goals over time. By analyzing data and getting to know students’ individual needs, teachers plan lessons informed by Universal Design for Learning guidelines and implement modifications and accommodations culminating in lessons that are appropriately challenging for all students. To inform instruction in reading, teachers utilize continuous IRLA formative assessments to determine students’ exact reading abilities and needs. In writing, students compose on-demand writing pieces at the beginning and end of each Unit of Study. These pre- and post- assessments are analyzed using Teachers College rubrics and the Teachers College Learning Progression to determine performance levels. In math, teachers use pre- and post-unit assessments, class work, and Exemplar problem solving tasks to assess students’ performance levels. All data is reviewed and used to create individualized action plans for students, to differentiate instruction, and to ensure effective universal access to content during whole class lessons. In teacher teams, teachers analyze student work to discuss strengths and next steps. Collaborative work analysis supports teachers in maintaining appropriately rigorous expectations and provides opportunities for teachers to learn new teaching strategies from their colleagues. Teachers utilize effective co-teaching models and the workshop model for delivery of most instruction to ensure effective direct instruction and modeling, guided instruction, independent practice, and opportunities for students to share their learning with each other. Student growth is celebrated through publishing parties and regular home-school communication. Integrated co-teaching teams work collaboratively to plan engaging lessons across content areas. Cluster teachers collaborate with classroom teachers to design engaging lessons that build on classroom learning. Grade level teams work together to create annual and unit plans that ensure consistency across the grade as well as alignment with CCLS. How do you envision enhancing collaboration amongst your Instructional Leadership Team to improve teacher practices and student learning? In an effort to build capacity and create more opportunities for teachers to exercise leadership roles in support of teacher collaboration and student learning, PS 15 will hire a peer collaborative and a model teacher to lead this work. A growing body of research indicates that principals in high performing schools promote the development of a team-based approach to leadership. Teacher leaders will help to facilitate PLCs, provide a framework for inter-visitations amongst teachers to observe and debrief best practice, and support cycles of action research. Administration will meet with model teachers monthly to provide feedback, guidance, and support. At least one model teacher will serve on the School Leadership Team (SLT) and report the progress of this initiative to SLT members. Each PLC team will be lead by an Instructional Council (IC) member to ensure regular minutes are maintained and student data is analyzed for impact. In addition to PLCs, teacher teams will be refined across the school to ensure maximal impact on teacher practice leading towards student achievement. Our IC will collaborate weekly to identify school-wide trends in data, make and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 39  implement instructional decisions including professional development, to support our school-wide CEP goals for student achievement. Structures will be implemented to ensure regular meeting times, agendas, and data analysis are completed. Each teacher team will have a lead teacher who will meet weekly with administration to support and guide the work. The work of all teams will be shared with the school community through our intranet site. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teachers will participate in professional learning communities (PLCs). Teachers will complete a survey to identify individual strengths and interests in which they would like to develop expertise. This survey will be used to form teams. PLCs will meet weekly and maintain meeting minutes on our Google online platform for shared access by all teachers. Teacher teams will then engage in cycles of action research on their related topic throughout the year. Sharings will be orchestrated across teacher teams to build capacity and make teachers aware of the collective expertise that exists within our school community. PLCs will use student data gathered through assessment and observation of teacher practice to determine impact of strategies selected for study. PLCs will be expected to conduct research, engage in inter-visitations, and make their learning visible to the larger school community. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve data driven teacher practices that result in improvement in student achievement? What data will teachers and the Instructional Leadership Team regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon needed adjustments to teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? Data Reviewed iReady Diagnostic (K-5) and Paper and pencil assessments (3-5) This data provides snapshots of how students are performing in ELA and Math in September, January, and June. IC will analyze data for school-wide trends to determine next steps for instruction and measure student progress. Intent NYS Testing data (3-5) To identify learning gaps and determine next steps PLC Meeting Minutes The instructional cabinet will review meeting minutes to ensure active implementation and analysis of student work to affect student progress. The instructional cabinet will utilize Advance data to analyze school-wide trends. Independent Reading Level Assessment (IRLA) Data Student Work To form and review student action plans and measure progress. Teachers will grade and analyze student work to ensure student progress and refine instructional practices. Describe the screening process you use to identify students who need extra help? How do you use this process to determine which intervention to provide? PS 15 utilizes multiple means of assessment to capture school-wide trends as well as individual student progress. 1. Benchmark assessments are administered in September, January, and June in ELA and Mathematics. 2. Unit assessments are administered in every unit of study as a pre-assessment before starting the unit and a post-assessment at the end of the unit. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 40  3. Teachers conduct daily/weekly reading conferences using the IRLA to determine reading levels and monitor progress. 4. Daily formative assessment occurs during instruction During preparation and professional periods, teachers analyze the results of the above assessments to:  Measure progress  Determine if action plans developed were successful  Determine next steps for instruction and lesson planning to support student needs   Determine student performance tiers Inform the work of their PLC to evaluate teacher practice and next steps Once data is analyzed and student learning tiers are established, interventions are put in place for individualized and small group instruction. Teachers create classroom conference and small group schedules ensuring tier 3 students are seen individually or in a small group three times per cycle and tier 2 students are seen two times per cycle. The Instructional Council will use the data to identify school-wide supports and interventions that are needed. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019 we will build capacity by developing expert teachers in the area of self-assessment to ensure cognitive engagement as measured by a 15% increase in the number of teachers earning a rating of highly effective in 3D: Assessment in Instruction, using the Danielson Framework, resulting in increased student achievement. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Average ELA proficiency rating of 2.73 Average Math proficiency rating of 2.88 2018-19 CEP-RISE 41  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teachers will complete a professional learning plan for their PLC work PLC teams will utilize a formal structure for recording meeting minutes and sharing resources used and student data on an intranet site accessible by all teachers. PLC teams will incorporate protocols for looking at student work and analyzing data. Selected teachers will participate in a District 1 labsite on assessment practices and turn key new learning to PLC. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Average ELA proficiency rating of 2.73 November 2018 Teacher Leaders Average Math proficiency rating of 2.88 Administration Instructional Council Teachers Average ELA proficiency rating of 2.73 November 2018 - May 2019 Teacher Leaders Administration Average Math proficiency rating of 2.88 Instructional Council Teachers Average ELA proficiency rating of 2.73 November 2018 - May 2019 Teacher Leaders Administration Average Math proficiency rating of 2.88 Instructional Council Teachers Average ELA proficiency rating of 2.73 October 2018 - June 2019 Teacher Leaders Administration Average Math proficiency rating of 2.88 Instructional Council How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) By November 2018 all PLC plans will be submitted. By October 2018, structure for minutes will be developed. PLC team minutes will name protocols used. Teachers will have begun participating in labsites. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 42  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will support parents/ families' understanding of Collaborative Teachers through “Coffee and Conversation” events with the principal to discuss Professional Learning Communities and school-wide goals. During the month of September, a "State of the School" address will be held to share information, including our school wide goals, PLCs and Teacher Team initiatives. A Model Teacher will present the work of PLCs and teacher teams to the SLT. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Administration (principal and Assistant principal) Teacher leaders: Model teacher and peer collaborative teacher Instructional council District 1 labsite offering Per diem for teachers to participate in labsite Intranet Supplies for PLCs (presentation boards, post its, tape, etc.) Per session for collaborative planning Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019:  PLC teams will have completed and documented the first cycle of research and assessment in their topic.  Every teacher will have been observed in the area of 3D: Assessment, as evidenced by Advance data. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Meeting minutes and Danielson Framework 2018-19 CEP-RISE 43  Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 44  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, SOP(s) Addressed Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). (aligned with Rise Key 2) Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. (aligned with Rise Key 6) x x 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. (aligned with Rise Key 1) 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). (aligned with Rise Keys 4 and 5) N/A x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? In the element of Effective School Leadership, PS15 data demonstrates effective practices. In the Framework for Great Schools Report, Effective School Leadership and Trust exceeded target based on the 2016 NYC School Survey. On the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey: 100% of teachers reported that the principal at this school: carefully tracks student academic progress sets high standards for student learning.    participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers.  makes clear to the staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals.  encourages feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders.  Makes it is clear how all of the programs offered are connected to their school's instructional vision. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 45  94% of families reported that the principal: is an effective manager who makes the school run smoothly   encourages feedback from the community and them through regular meetings.  is strongly committed to shared decision making. In our 2016-2017 Quality Review, PS15 received a rating of well-developed in quality indicators 1.1, Curriculum, 1.3, Resource Allocation, 1.4, Learning Environment, and 4.1, Teacher Support and Supervision, noting that, "School leaders conduct frequent formal and informal observations of instruction and provide teachers with effective feedback and next steps..." Based on our 2017 school survey, in the area of Effective School Leadership, PS 15 exceeded the district average by 0.31 and the city average by 0.48. While this is an area of strength for the school, in the area of teacher influence:  71% of teachers say that they have influence over the selection of instructional materials used in classrooms.  75% of teachers say that they have influence over the development of instructional materials. PS 15 believes strongly in shared leadership and the collective responsibility and personalized learning that stem from it. As such, for the 2017-2018 school year, PS15 will focus on the development of shared leadership structures that enable teachers to assume leadership roles in working toward achieving our shared vision. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? Our vision for effective school leadership is defined by leaders who foster trust through: demonstrated instructional expertise, effective operational management, and integrity and transparency. School leaders are attuned to staff members’ potential and create distributed leadership, including P2L involvement and development of model teachers. They lead by example as they actively listen, regulate emotions, project an optimistic and problem-solving attitude, and demonstrate confidence in others by conferring leadership opportunities and holding them accountable for results. They understand instructional best practices and are present in classrooms, both observing and modeling. They understand the central importance of SEL for both students and staff and maintain structures for PBIS and Ruler while seeking opportunities to deepen this work. Communication is clear and effective and new ideas are sought and welcomed. Effective school leaders consistently seek ways to innovate and refine practice. The school leader, together with the SLT and larger school community, creates a shared vision and mission. The vision and mission are communicated to the school community during staff development and PTA meetings, in faculty and parent handbooks, and on our website. CEP goals and accountability measures reflect our shared vision and mission. SLT members include essential CBO partners P2L and CFK. Our P2L Community School Director is a part of our attendance committee as well as an SLT member. These partners are intrinsically involved in creating and implementing CEP goals and action plans, and their resources are harnessed to support the school’s mission. P2L’s Community School Director is stationed at our school, and CFKs site coordinator is stationed here two to three times weekly. Working on-site makes 2018-19 CEP-RISE 46  them truly part of the school community, with first-hand understanding of student needs. Regular meetings with leadership to plan, problem-solve and reflect ensure that we are productively executing our shared mission. Supports to ensure individual improvement include: scheduled common planning time to review student progress including scheduled cycles of action planning, PLCs, and cycles of teacher observation, as well as inter-visitation feedback from instructional consultants, and peers. Additionally, the creation of small learning teams will ensure that individual teachers experience personalized learning and collectively, teachers ensure that schoolwide student achievement goals are met. The school leader is involved in planning and debriefing with instructional consultants and teachers to ensure a consistent focus on both school-wide and individual goals for improvement. In addition, in weekly meetings and regular follow-through, she works with the attendance committee to analyze trends and strategize action plans to raise attendance. To ensure that students' needs are met, the leader has created weekly common planning times and opportunities for peer inter-visitation. In addition, funds are allocated to provide substitute teachers so that classroom teachers can engage in professional development. Per session is allocated for teachers to collaboratively plan instruction that meets the needs of their students. Classroom schedules are designed to provide ample time for students to engage in targeted literacy and math instruction as well as physical activity and enrichment. At least two study groups across the year focus on classroom schedules to ensure that learning time is maximized and that students’ needs are met. The school leader has a layered and purposeful approach to conducting observations. Individual professional goals as well as school-wide goals provide the context. Strengths and areas for continued growth are recorded in a database so that subsequent observations can focus on growth in identified areas. The school leader and teacher discuss the lesson shortly after the observation followed by a written report. Reports include specific actionable feedback, and frequently include resources, explicit suggestions and follow up through professional development. Shared accountability is an intrinsic result of the community school structure. Consistent with a distributed leadership model, PS15 ensures shared leadership and accountability with P2L. Community School Director and AP will have explicitly defined areas of responsibility and will take the lead in coordinating initiatives. The Community School Director will be especially involved in the areas of Strong Family and Community Ties and Supportive Environment through family engagement and student mental health support. The AP will be especially involved in Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teachers through instructional initiatives pertaining to literacy and student supports. Attendance accountability is effectively shared. The attendance committee includes P2L, school nurse, parent coordinator, school staff, and guidance counselors. There is a defined information flow from committee to teachers regarding action plans and follow up. All stakeholders will share accountability for student social-emotional learning and mental health. Systems will include the implementation of a mental health tracking system developed by P2L and meetings between guidance and P2L social workers. P2L will deliver teacher development to enhance understanding and expertise in Social-Emotional Literacy. This will ensure that all stakeholders will develop a common understanding of social emotional literacy, and will be attuned to students’ social-emotional needs and their own response to those needs. What are your core belief(s) for school improvement and how they inform your vision for developing instructional leadership at your school? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 47  Our core beliefs for school improvement are:  A shared vision  Challenging curriculum and engaged student learning    Proactive community relations Learning community Supportive organizational structures Shared leadership is at the heart of all instructional work. By allowing teachers to be the driving force for change and creating the conditions for them to be successful, we ensure that we embody our core beliefs. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Our vision for developing differentiated leadership is a community where teachers, partners, and staff take responsibility and ownership for the success of our students. In an atmosphere of mutual trust and transparency, we leverage individual strengths and interests of stakeholders to build leadership capacity and distribution. During the 2018-2019 school year, PS15 will have a team of one model teacher and one peer collaborative teacher that will take a leadership role in enhancing our practice and professional learning. They will play a key role in planning, implementing, monitoring, and evaluating Professional Learning Communities across the school. They will engage in monthly leadership team meetings with administration. They will work together with the Instructional Council whose role will be to analyze school-wide data, identify trends, make instructional decisions, communicate findings with the school community, implement action steps, and plan and deliver professional development. In addition, small learning teams across the school will develop their practices through collaboration, research, and action that leads to student achievement. Community partners will become active members of our school leadership team and take an active role in leading parent involvement initiatives, and advancing our agenda for developing student characters and communicating and modeling our school values. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? We will foster collaborative school governance processes by including CBOs and ensuring equal representation of family and staff members on the School Leadership Team. All members will be provided with access to school data and budgets, and play an active role in the creation and monitoring of the schools R-CEP goals. In addition, our Instructional Council comprised of cross-grade classroom teachers that will make instructional decisions for the school. How will you use evidence-based systems to ensure school and teacher leaders are led by a cycle of continuous learning and use this to inform their teams’ priorities? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Advance Evaluation Reports Beginning of year meetings, pre- and post-observation conferences, end of year meetings, and Teacher Improvement Plan (TIP) meetings three times per year, personalized Administration, teachers 2018-19 CEP-RISE 48  Written transcripts of lessons Advance Data Reports Observation reflection sheets Part 3 – Annual Goal professional learning web pages for teachers with individualized resources. Post-observation reflection conferences, PS15 reflection form, Individualized Professional Learning web pages for teachers with individualized resources. Beginning of year meetings, pre- and post-observation conferences, end of year meetings, and Teacher Improvement Plan (TIP) meetings three times per year, individualized professional learning web pages for teachers with individualized resources. Post-observation reflection conferences, Administration, teachers Administration, model teachers, teachers Administration, teachers Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, we will implement shared leadership structures consisting of small learning teams and teacher leaders serving as the conduit for shared communication, improved teacher practice, and improved student achievement as measured by an average ELA proficiency rating of 2.73. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Average ELA proficiency rating of 2.73 2018-19 CEP-RISE 49  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Learning Teams will: Teachers Average ELA proficiency rating of 2.73 How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Completed professional learning plans Sept 2018 – June 2019 Administration Instructional Council Teachers TCRWP and Metamorphosis September 2018, January 2019, and June 2019 reflections  Have established  teacher leaders Set goals for their work  Engage in self-assessment and reflection tri-annually to determine effectiveness of their work. Include Instructional Council, PLCs, Special Education team, Grade level team, and G&T team   Work with consultants from Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project, Metamorphosis, and American Reading Company Identify and communicate new and existing leadership roles across the school. Cultivate and communicate a shared vision of leadership that includes collective responsibility for the well-being and effectiveness of the school community. Teachers Average ELA Sept 2018 Administration proficiency rating of 2.73 Teachers Average ELA Sept 2018 Administration proficiency rating of 2.73 Leadership roles displayed in the school. Professional development held in September 2018-19 CEP-RISE 50 Teachers Average ELA Sept 2018 Administration proficiency rating of 2.73 Teachers Average ELA proficiency rating of 2.73 Sept - Oct 2018 Administration Cultivate and communicate a shared vision and purpose for learning teams and roles of teacher leaders. Create organizational structures: To support team communication To schedule team meetings, check-ins with administration, and team reflection Professional development held in September The development of communication tools on our intranet site. Completed meeting schedules 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will support parents/ families understanding of Effective Leadership through “Coffee and Conversation” events with the principal to discuss school leadership and school-wide goals. Shared leadership structures will be shared with parents. We will promote parent leadership through access to information, established parent leadership roles, and open communication. During the month of September, a meeting will be held to share information with parents about SLT and PTA and how they can become involved. School administrators, the Parent Coordinator, and the Community school director will be responsible for providing information to parents. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project Consultants Metamorphosis Consultants Per session Professional learning time Common planning time Principal AP CSD Supplies 2018-19 CEP-RISE 51  Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, there will be 20% decrease in the number of Tier 2 and tier 3 students as measured by the iReady ELA diagnostic assessment. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. iReady diagnostic assessment Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 52  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. (aligned with Rise Key 2) 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. (aligned with Rise Key 4 and 6) 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. (aligned with Rise Key 5) 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. (aligned with Rise Key 3) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X n/a n/a n/a 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? PS15 excels at developing strong relationships and learning about the needs of our community members. In the area of School Culture, the 2016-2017 Quality Review Report rates component 1.4 Well Developed and component 3.4 Proficient. This reflects mutual trust and a culture for learning which is communicated to staff ,students and family. In the area of High Expectations (3.4), the report finds that "teacher teams and staff establish a culture of high expectations" with an impact demonstrated by "clear expectations and continuous guidance and support [that helps] families understand their children's progress and provides actionable feedback to students that prepares them for the next level of learning." On the 2017-2018 School Survey, measures of Outreach to Parents were 96% positive, exceeding citywide average by +1%. Measures of Parent Involvement in Schools (as reported by parents) were also strong, at 91%, +1% over citywide average. However, 85% of parents responded that they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school sometimes or often. While this percentage exceeds the citywide average of 75% and shows growth from last year, there are additional steps we can and should be taking to further engage parents. During our 2016-2017 Quality Review debrief, our reviewer reported that during the family meeting, participants described the many supports the school provides to families and students. However, fewer participants could describe support they themselves had provided to the school. The school must work to identify additional avenues for reciprocal support to ensure that families are not only served by the school, but are instrumental and active contributors within the school community. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties 2018-19 CEP-RISE 53  What is your vision for strong family and community ties at your school? What opportunities exist for the school staff to know the students and their families in order to better communicate and partner with families and communities in the vision for the school? Our vision for strong family and community ties is a warm, open, and welcoming environment for students and families. Families have a sense of ownership and belonging. Interactions among stakeholders are characterized by mutual respect and reciprocal communication. Families are empowered to make informed decisions and participate in their children’s academic achievement. Resources and services are readily available and tailored to meet individual needs. The school serves as a hub of learning for all, and all community members have a shared vision for success. Our warm and caring environment supports open communication between parents, teachers, and administration. As we learn about the various needs in our community, we work to meet their needs by fostering many community partnerships that bring both enrichment and vital support to families. Current partnerships bring to our community dental and vision care, mental health services, student leadership opportunities, music, arts, and drama. With our partner, P2L, we will expand our services in response to family needs as determined by school-designed surveys, interpersonal feedback, and monthly “Coffee and Conversation” interactions. During Meet the Teacher night, a parent survey will be given to families so they can share important information about their child. Additional conversations are scheduled throughout the year to better ascertain students’ interests, talents, and needs as well as strengths, talents, and needs of family members. The school reaches out to parents to provide information about curricular expectations through monthly newsletters with attached writing and math rubrics to inform them about the level of work expected from their children. To deepen their understanding of those expectations, teachers will take advantage of parent engagement time to design and/or conduct workshops around CCLS. In addition to report cards, progress reports are shared with parents three times per year, informing parents of their child’s current progress and giving specific suggestions for home activities and supports. The school will facilitate parent sign-up to NYC Schools Accounts to ensure family access to their child’s assessment data and will help them learn to navigate the system. School computers in the lobby have a parent log-in with bookmarks and links to NYC Schools Accounts and other key resources. Furthermore, as a School-wide Enrichment Model school, parents and community members will be instrumental in celebrating student success by attending sharing and showcase events, volunteering their talents and abilities in the classroom, by co-facilitating clusters, and serving as guest speakers. New for the 2018-2019 school year, a team of PS 15 teachers will engage in family home visits to build strong relationships with families and ensure timely and appropriate support for families. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 54  Families are warmly welcomed by our office staff and our safety agent (recipient of the 2014-2015 and 2015-2016 Safety Agent Recognition Award). In our lobby, we have two computers with internet access and a printer, specifically for family use. School safety and office staff are trained to provide courteous service to all visitors. Families are invited to utilize school resources, such as our Library Media Center. Our parent coordinator makes herself available to all families. A space is maintained by the PTA on the first floor for families. Bulletin boards dedicated to providing families with information is available inside the lobby. Our community school partner, P2L, engages parents in conversations and helps foster strong parent engagement. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? In 2018-2019, PS15 will build upon our successes in the 2017-2018 school year by continuing to develop and strengthen our Parent Teacher Association. Administration, our parent coordinator, teachers, guidance counselors, and our community partner, P2L, will engage families in conversations around parent leadership. We will provide our newly elected PTA board members with professional development and assign liaisons to each member for support. School staff will take an active role in attending and presenting at PTA meetings, and regular meetings will be scheduled between administration and parent board members. This will ensure active parent participation and parent voice in PTA and SLT meetings. Regular surveys will be provided to all families to gather input on school-wide initiatives. Lastly, PS 15 in collaboration with P2L, will involve parents in decision-making and problem solving through regular parent surveys; agenda items during PTA meetings; and breakfast social clubs, "Coffee and Conversation with the Principal", where we will elicit feedback and encourage conversations around needs and supports. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? As a community, teachers will work together in June to share pertinent information about each child. In September, all teachers will participate in Meet the Teacher night. During this time, parents are informed about their child's class and provided with an opportunity to provide insight about their child. Additionally, as part of the enrichment initiative, they will be provided with results of a Renzulli Learning student survey that identifies their child's learning preferences and interests. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: PS15 staff partners with families to support student success. Our attendance committee members meet with parents to create success plans to improve attendance. Teachers and administrators meet with parentsregularly to devise plans for academic and social emotional support for students. Our parentcoordinator regularly partners with parents to support family needs and make community referrals. Family partnerships with CBO: Families partner with Jewish Board of Family and Children's Services, JBFCS, to coordinate mental health services for students and families. In addition, P2L will partner with families by:  Engaging in monthly parent forums connected to PTA meetings to encourage participation and feedback 2018-19 CEP-RISE 55  Is there dedicated space for these partnerships?  Providing health care services such as dental, vision, and routine screenings and physicals  Providing job readiness training such as interviewing techniques, resume writing, job search, and organizational strategies  Providing mental health services  Developing an environment of trust and mutual aid, encouraging greater parent involvement  Providing family support services such as culture and recreation, mental health, and workshops  Coordinate after school services, and social emotional support. CBOshave dedicated spaces for these partnerships. PS15 has a dedicated PTA space and regularly partners with P2L to share space for parent engagement. Guidance counselors maintain separateoffices where they meet with and work with parents to support student success. In addition, parentsare welcome to utilize the lobby for computer and internetaccess, as well as the Library Media Center. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success, in addition to report cards? In addition to report cards, progress reports are sent home three times per year identifying students’ strengths in core academic and social emotional skills. Students' individualized goals are outlined with clear and specific next steps parents can take to support their child at home. On a daily basis, students bring home skills cards that identify students learning goals in reading. In writing, rubrics are sent home to ensure parents understand how students are graded. In addition, parent letters will be sent home post-unit to inform parents of student’s performance along specific indicators. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, PS 15 will partner with parents to support and improve the learning, development, and health of students by providing frequent and varied opportunities for parent engagement resulting in participation by 25% of families. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve: Framework: Strong Family and Community Ties 3.83 2018-19 CEP-RISE 56  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Improve communication with families by increasing the frequency and content. Communicate a shared vision for student success and common language for discussing our communities core values Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parents Framework: Strong Family and Community Ties 3.83 September 2018 – June 2019 Administration P2L CSD Parents Framework: Strong Family and Community Ties 3.83 September – October 2018 Parent Coordinator Teachers Administration P2L CSD Parent Coordinator Provide parent workshops and resources that support at home learning Parents and Students Framework: Strong Family and Community Ties 3.83 Monthly Administration September 2018 – June 2019 P2L CSD Parent Coordinator TCRWP Metamorphosis Wediko Provide opportunities for parents to volunteer in school Parents Framework: Strong Family and Community Ties 3.83 September 2018 – June 2019 Administration P2L CSD Parent Coordinator How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Monthly classroom newsletters Quarterly school newsletters September state of the school address will include vision and core values Classroom newsletters contain specific supports for at home learning. Parenting tips will be provided Parent page will be revised to include supports for at home learning Bi-monthly volunteer ads distributed 2018-19 CEP-RISE 57  Provide community building opportunities to foster relationships among parents and staff. Implement structures for collecting information about families and providing timely parental support. Parents Framework: Strong Family and Community Ties 3.83 Quarterly from September 2018 – June 2019 Parents Framework: Strong Family and Community Ties 3.83 September – October 2018 Quarterly Family fun workshops and events scheduled Information gathering template created Administration P2L CSD Parent Coordinator Administration P2L CSD Parent Coordinator Nurse Wediko Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. P2L TCRWP Metamorphosis Wediko Principal/ Assistant Principal Parents Parent Coordinator Teachers Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 58  By February 2019, providing frequent and varied opportunities for parent engagement resulting in participation by 20% of families. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent service recording form will be used to measure progress. Parent sign in sheets will be used to gauge participation Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 59  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should aligned to the Rise Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Rise ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 20% decrease in the total number of tier 2 and 3 students as measured by the Independent Reading Level Assessment through extensive differentiated instruction and practice. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Rise ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Rise ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Rise ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. PS15 will ensure participation in the ELT by setting the school-day hours inclusive of ELT. Parent information sessions and handbooks will list the school day as 8:40am- 4:00pm with 3pm-4pm listed as the extended hour. For parents who wish to remove their child from the extended hour, a one-on-one meeting will be scheduled with the family to explain the benefits of participation in the extended hour and how it will support academic success. Daily attendance records for ELT will be maintained to confirm participation. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Rise School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 60   What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? Our ELT program will be offered in collaboration with P2L and other community partners. Students will engage in 2 days of literacy instruction, 2 days of math instruction, and 1 day of enrichment. For literacy and math instruction, PS 15 teachers will have the opportunity to work side by side with P2L after-school facilitators to provide engaging instruction in literacy and math that actively addresses the learning needs and interests of students. The ELT teachers will provide students with targeted differentiated instruction using formative classroom data to support academic growth, seamlessly extending the school day. Teachers will have access to IEP and ENL mandates and ensure full implementation. Technology will be fully integrated to capture students' interest and strengthen student engagement. On ELA days, students will engage in interactive read-aloud, shared reading, and on-line independent reading using iReady and MyOn. Teachers will utilize CCLS-aligned Handwriting Without Tears, a highly regarded K-5 RTI appropriate program, to develop writing fluency and language art skills through various engaging multi-sensory activities. On Math days, students will engage in interactive math practice through iReady and Investigations on-line platforms.The math sessions will provide targeted practice in problem solving and fluency in number sense and operations. Students will play differentiated math games that support individual student needs. P2L staff members will engage in various school day activities with students and join teachers during their professional development time to develop shared understandings of school and student goals and take part in professional learning. The enrichment component (one session per week) will deliver engaging content, such as dance, photography, media, art, chess, etc. These opportunities will foster students’ social skills through peer interaction during experiential, hands-on activity, and further their positive connection with school. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 61  Community partners will participate in P2L and PS15's professional development. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. ELT instruction will be provided by classroom teachers to ensure that the adults who know students the best are the ones providing academic support. After-school facilitators, skilled in various enrichment areas (i.e. art, dance, photography, media, etc.) will work side by side with teachers leading to a more engaging ELT program. Professional development offered during professional development time and school-day PD will support teachers with implementation of the renewal hour. P2L staff members will engage in various school day activities with students and join teachers during professional development. By ensuring that P2L staff members are involved during the school day, students will have the unique opportunity to get to know and trust all renewal hour staff early in the year and continue to build a relationship with each other. Immediately following the renewal hour, students who remain for for after-school programming will have snack, homework help, and clubs such as dance, sports, chess, Spanish, and art. School administrators will oversee the ELT program in collaboration with the P2L Community School Director. Teachers will utilize various assessments including teacher-made number-sense and operations assessment, iReady assessments, and IRLA reading levels to monitor progress. Assessments will be administered at the beginning, middle, and end of the ELT program. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. ELT will be implemented throughout the entire school year (September 7, 2017 - June 26, 2018). Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program.  Teachers  P2L Staff  Administrators  Handwriting Without Tears Materials  Exemplars  Computers  Math Games from Investigations    MyOn digital reading platform  iReady ELA and Math Online Platform Leveled Texts IRLA Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 62  Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By October 2017, baseline number sense and operations assessment will be administered to 100% of grade K-2 ELT students, and iReady math assessment will be administered to 100% 3rd - 5th grade students By January 2018, there will be a 10% decrease in the number of tier 2 and 3 students as measured by the IRLA. By January 2018, there will be a 20% increase in average grade K-2 student performance as measured by number sense and operations assessment. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Independent Reading Level Assessment (IRLA) Number Sense and Operations Assessment iReady ELA and Math Assessment Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 63  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) How is the Community School strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The after-school program is designed so that CBO staff pushes into ELT, supporting teachers and creating a seamless transition between day school and after-school. By partnering with classroom teachers, CBO staff gain an understanding of PS 15’s academic goals and themes, and are able to make clear connections between their enrichment activities and academic habits and expectations. In addition, the after-school program begins with a block of Homework Help, ensuring that students complete assignments and are able to work through difficult passages with a supportive adult, and with their peers. In school year 2017-2018 we made an adjustment in our Mental Health strategy to bring in Wediko Children’s Services. They provided, and will continue to provide, essential observations and coaching for school staff dealing with behavioral challenges. In particular, Wediko staff brought together the Paraprofessionals in a supportive learning community. Paras read the book Skill Streaming and case-conferenced around specific students. These activities, and the supportive nature of the group, enhanced their practice in our classrooms. The combined efforts of these strategies has resulted in teachers, school based staff, and CBO staff with increased confidence in working with students, and a diverse tool box of engagement and social emotional learning strategies. Furthermore, students benefit from individualized attention and time for completing assignments. As a result, during the 2017-2018 school year, there was a 34% reduction in the number of tier 2 and tier 3 students in reading and a 33% reduction in the number of tier 2 and tier 3 students in mathematics. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. We are committed to building on our 2017-2018 parent engagement work by focusing on creating a “Family as Teacher” team. By June 2019, PS 15 and P2L will providing a minimum of five parent workshops to develop parents’ skills in supporting their student’s academic progress and develop a deeper understanding of child development by as 2018-19 CEP-RISE 64  measured by 20% of parents attending a workshop. Additionally, on a post-survey, at least 50% of attendees will Agree or Strongly Agree that they a) are more confident in engaging with their child’s academics and b) spend more time engaging their child with activities they learned in the series. Parent workshops will include topics such as:  Modeling a “Read-Aloud”  Practicing Developmentally Appropriate Skills with My Child  Asking Better Questions  What Does Effective Homework Help Look Like at Home? Please answer the following question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? The super-objective for all Community School related activities is to have 100% of our students physically present and mentally ready to learn every day. By providing academic and social emotional supports in ELT, aggressively inviting students to school with our attendance supports, forging deep relationships with families, and providing students and families with vital mental health and related services, we believe we are on track to achieve that objective. Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Pathways 2 Leadership: ELT Whole school and targeted. Pathways to Leadership: Whole school and targeted. Attendance Supports CBO staff push-in to ELT (Renewal Hour) to strengthen connections between day school and after-school, and support teachers with SEL. P2L offers an after-school program to students grades 2-5. CBO staff sits on the attendance team, sharing data from the New Visions Data Sorter. Interventions are identified for each student given their personal and familial needs; CSD is a leader in communicating with families, specifically around attendance and to build trust; P2L hosts special events and the popular “Proud Moment Fairs” on days with historically low attendance, such as the Friday before a school vacation; the work of P2L Social 2018-19 CEP-RISE 65  Pathways to Leadership: Whole school and targeted. Family Engagement Creative Artists Agency; Change for Kids; MarK DeGarmo Dance: Whole school and targeted Family Engagement Pathways to Leadership: Health & Wellness All students, including students with attendance below 90%, and students with emotional needs. Wediko Children’s Services: Faculty and Staff Health & Wellness Jewish Board: Health & Wellness Students with emotional needs identified as Tier 3. Worker and SW interns serve to create strong school attachment in students and families, which has a positive impact on attendance. CSD works closely with the parent coordinator and PA to provide families with engaging and relevant workshops; CBO after-school staff connect with parents of participating students on a daily basis, sharing successes and challenges and creating a partnership of support for students; CSD and P2L staff take the lead on hosting community events such as the Multicultural Night and Community School Forum. PS15 has strong partnerships with several organizations not funded through AIDP. These organizations engage families by hosting special events, participating in student performances, and providing enrichment activities to students. The CSD helps coordinate and publicize all partnerships and events. Social emotional support and de-escalation for all students; supportive counseling for students with emotional needs identified as Tier 2 and Tier 3; extended learning time with a focus on positive relationship building and Classroom observations, coaching, and professional development training for all staff as well as targeted groups and individuals. Mental health counseling-clinical. Non-AIDP funded, but an integral part of the mental health team. Part 2b. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. 2. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 66  3. 4. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. Kathleen Shamwell was hired as Community School Director in 2014 and has become an integral member of the PS15 community. At the start of the AIDP grant, a school wide needs assessment was completed with all teaching staff and parents, leading to the creation of medium- and long-term goals and immediate next steps. Continuous assessment of these goals takes place with P2L and PS15 staff working in concert. P2L’s active involvement in SLT, PPT, attendance committee meetings, school safety committee meetings, and weekly guidance and administrative meetings ensures timely review of critical data and opportunities to problem solve and target interventions, monitor progress, and case manage individual students. The strategies, programs, and initiatives listed below define the specific ways in which we will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. Strategies for personalization to meet the needs of the whole school community and targeted high needs students include, but are not limited to: 1. Conduct a needs and capacity assessment using a range of tools and data sources including The Community School Partnership Assessment, Community School Climate Self-Assessment Tool, and Community Needs Assessment, found on communityschools.org as well as current data sources such as the School Environment survey, NYS school report card, NYS test scores, NYC progress report, NYC Quality Review, and academic formative assessments 2. Increase student engagement (whole school and targeted student engagement)  Provide academic enrichment and remedial education  Provide arts, music, and cultural programs  Provide ELT programming tied to Core Curriculum Standards and STEM  Provide students with opportunities for community service and service learning  Provide education in conflict resolution  Develop personal and social skills  Provide high quality education  Provide mental health services 3. Engaging Parents (whole school and targeted)  Engage in monthly parent forums connected to PTA meetings to encourage participation and feedback  Provide parenting and health education such as cooking, nutrition, parenting classes  Provide parents with training in skills and strategies to support their children’s academic achievement  Provide adult education such as GED, technology, ELL, finance and budgeting classes  Provide health care services such as dental, vision, and routine screenings and physicals  Provide job readiness training such as interviewing techniques, resume writing, job search, and organizational strategies  Provide mental health services  Develop an environment of trust and mutual aid, encouraging greater parent involvement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 67   Provide family support services such as culture and recreation, mental health, and workshops  Involve parents in decision-making and problem solving through regular parent surveys, agenda items during PTA meetings, and breakfast social clubs where we will elicit feedback and encourage conversations around needs and supports that may address them 4. Engaging Staff (whole school)  Provide professional development to equip teachers with the skills and knowledge they need to support students and families in ways that are culturally responsive.  Develop structures for staff communication regarding available services and partnerships including presentations by school partners on their mission and the services they provide  Create opportunities for leadership and collaboration  Involve SLT and school staff in decision-making and problem solving 5. Engaging community (whole school)  Provide community supports for neighborhood residents by making the school building available for out-of-school-time services and clubs, and support groups  Provide families with access to computers and washer/dryer   Foster neighborhood pride through beautification projects and community building activities Foster effective collaborations with neighborhood gardens to cultivate and enhance our existing gardening club while supporting local efforts Further nurture and develop the number and scope of services through community partners by effectively coordinating and maximizing in school and after school services   Create a welcoming environment  Implement structures for communication to ensure that partnerships are mutually productive, beneficial and informed 6. Implement a school-wide initiative centered on The Habits of Mind (HOM), a repertoire of positive behaviors that help students, parents, and teachers be pro-active and successfully navigate the various challenges and problems they encounter in the classroom and everyday life. 7. Address attendance (whole school and targeted)  Incorporate a structured cycle inclusive of assessment, action planning, and implementation to ensure timely, personalized support of students and families  Create opportunities for acknowledging and rewarding significant improvements in attendance.  Leverage mental health services so that students feel welcome and successful at school. 8. Communicate regularly (whole school)  Agenda items on monthly PTA meetings (third Wednesday of the month)  Agenda items on monthly SLT meetings (third Wednesday of the month)  Monthly meetings facilitated by Community School Director  Regular updates to parent website with links to community partners’ websites and opportunities for comments and emails from parents and the community (via computers in the lobby made available to parents)  Maintain regular and ongoing communication with partners via emails and phone  Monthly breakfast socials with administrators for conversation, problem solving, and feedback PS 15 and Pathways to Leadership will implement the following programs and initiatives: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 68  School Based Intervention (SBI - A Targeted Intervention) One-on-one mentoring is a crucial support for students with unstable home lives, limited role models, and emotional trauma. P2L’s SBI is a targeted program for at-risk students referred by school staff. The program is structured around therapeutic mentoring, conflict resolution, and school engagement. Targeted students will be assigned a counselor (social worker or social work intern) who checks in with them daily, meets with them regularly and will be the point person in assessing the student’s needs and connecting him/her with any additional services. The program will work with students to develop competencies and help them to foster identity and purpose and respond positively to their emotions/behavioral impulses and environment. Counselors collaborate with all stakeholders (the SLT, parents/caregivers, case/family workers, STH coordinators, Jewish Board, and teachers) to identify each student’s academic and emotional needs through the parameters of school incidents, risk assessment, and academic challenges. Using this information they create an individualized plan for academic remediation and enrichment, social-emotional enrichment and resiliency restoration. In collaboration with teachers, parents, and any mandated service providers, the counselors outline the goals, objectives, and expectations for all parties involved to create a framework that encourages pro-social behavior and student achievement. In addition to daily check-ins, mentoring will be provided to targeted students individually and in groups. Group mentoring for students that need further support will be set up with opportunities for them to interact with their peers in a structured group. This approach builds a community and allows them to learn what others are doing to overcome similar obstacles to attendance and academic achievement. 4. ELT Programming (whole school and targeted) 5. Parent Workshops (whole school and targeted) Working closely with Principal Sanchez and the parent coordinator, P2L will lead and/or procure workshops to engage our parents and provide them with skills and information in personal development and supporting their child’s education. These workshops will offer parents information and strategies for improving their home life, finances, and coping with the many challenges they face, especially for our homeless and doubled up families. In addition, workshops will be offered that engage parents and children in ways to strengthen and support family ties and provide easy-to-do, low cost activities for the whole family. The focus for school year 2018-2019 will be supporting student academics, as outlined in the summative goal. Attendance Initiative (whole school and targeted intervention) The initiative will build on and augment current practices to identify the root cause of attendance issues and provide timely support as well as implement proactive measures that will develop lifelong habits. Interventions will include whole school and targeted interventions in collaborations with the attendance committee, teachers, mentors, and parents. Part 3 – Community School Partnerships Oversight 2018-19 CEP-RISE 69  Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students The Community School program is implemented in collaboration with P2L. The school administrators and Community School Director oversee the program with support from P2L’s Director of Programming and Director of Clinical Services. Additional partners such as Jewish Board, Wediko Children’s Services, Change for Kids, Creative Arts Agency, Mark DeGarmo Dancers, Arts for All, NYU, and others will join resources to maximize services provided to students and families. With the support of the data platform designed by New Visions for Community Schools, individualized student dashboards and reports are created weekly to assess and align attendance and academic improvement initiatives, and illustrate emerging trends. The Community School Team meets monthly in addition to monthly meeting with PTA and SLT meetings and weekly attendance meetings. The CS meeting is lead by Community School Director Kathleen Shamwell and includes: Principal Irene Sanchez, P2L Social Worker Samantha Winer, Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal, Laura Salmon In concert with the New Visions platform, P2L social work staff maintains their own process recordings on sessions providing continuous assessment of progress for students in the SBI program. Weekly case conferencing provides an opportunity to adjust individualized interventions as needed. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Human Resources: PS15 Administration and staff; P2L staff; CBO Partner staff; Parents; Social workers and guidance counselors. Instructional Materials/PD Materials: As needed to engage participants and meet the goals of each program. Enrichment Materials: For use in after-school and for art-therapy/play-therapy activities for SBI. Schedule Adjustments: Time is made during the school year for students to participate in performances, trips, and Proud Moment Fairs. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Summer 2018: Collaborative planning for after-school activities and parent workshops. Fall 2018: Partners finalize staffing, schedules, and program objectives. Parents are made aware of opportunities and the calendar of events. Ongoing: Assessments and adjustments of activities as needed. Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this R-CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 70  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Multiple literacy assessments including running records and phonics skills assessments and NYS test scores are used to identify students in RTI tiers 2 and 3 as measured by the IRLA. Multiple math assessments including number sense and operations benchmark assessments, end of unit assessments and exemplars assessments and NYS test scores are used to identify students in RTI tiers 2 and 3 Tier 3:0-50%; Tier 2 51-69%; Tier 1 70-100%) End of unit assessments and NYS test scores are used to identify students in RTI tiers 2 and 3. Multiple non-fiction literacy assessments including running records and phonics skills assessments, Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group instruction, 1:1, tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day and after school Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided reading, individualized conferring, strategy groups in reading and writing, small group systematic multi-sensory phonics instruction Strategy groups, individualized instruction and conferring Small group instruction, 1:1 conferring During the school day and after school Content area focus through literacy instruction Small group instruction During the school day Content area focus through literacy instruction Small group instruction During the school day 2018-19 CEP-RISE 71 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Expeditionary Learning writing samples are used to identify students in RTI tiers 2 and 3. Students are identified through teacher referrals,ODRs and other social-emotional data, observations, parent referrals, and PPT meetings designed to proactively support students and prevent the need for an IEP. Small group, individual meetings, parent/child meetings During the school day Alternative recess, girls’ group, boys’ group, social-emotional support groups, individual counseling, mediation, family services (CBO) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 72  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 44 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing are provided with school uniforms, book bags, and school supplies to ensure that they are school ready. In addition to AIS counseling that is available for students, we offer universal, selective, and targeted social emotional interventions that match their need. Through various partnerships student receive in school mentoring and clinical mental health support. Students are provided with AIS supports in core content areas and extended school day opportunities. Parents are offered opportunities to attend relevant workshops, utilize school resources as needed, and are kept informed about their students progress and how they can support them at home. Our parent coordinator, guidance counselors, and community school partner engage with parents regular and make referrals to local agencies that can assist them with various needs. In addition, we have partner with NYU to provide students with dental check-ups and cleanings. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 73  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 CEP-RISE 74  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 1. A school hiring committee has been created to ensure a highly qualified applicant is selected. They are interviewed by the team and asked a specific set of questions. If they pass the first round, they are invited to return for a demonstration lesson. After the demonstration lesson, the candidate meets with available team members to reflect on the lesson. The team ensures that all applicants hold the appropriate certification for the position before they are called for an interview. 2. Our HR director is contacted before all hires to ensure that candidates are highly qualified. 3. To retain HQ teachers, we ensure that our school celebrates and expects collaboration and continuous learning. As professionals, teachers find satisfaction in having peers who can serve as thinking partners and opportunities to develop their practice and push their own thinking. Opportunities for collaboration are built into our school schedule through common planning time and a flexible coverage schedule that enables teachers to visit each others' classes. 4. To further develop their practice teachers receive focused and differentiated professional development. 5. Teachers’ professionalism is honored and encouraged as they choose professional development goals to 6. pursue. Increased parent involvement opportunities and CBO support for student needs will create a strong home-school partnership that will lead to a collaborative environment that ensures the retention and recruitment of highly qualified teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). High quality professional development is in alignment with PS 15’s R-CEP goals and strategies. We firmly believe that all students can receive rigorous CCLS-aligned instruction when teachers fully understand the content and can utilize effective instructional and pedagogical practices. To accomplish this, teachers participate in a myriad of professional development opportunities. To ensure consistency and thorough understanding of practices, the principal and/ or Assistant Principal participate in most professional development opportunities alongside teachers. In addition to school level PD, consultants specializing in key areas will support teachers alongside literacy and math coaches. In 2018-19 CEP-RISE 75  addition, P2L and district and Borough resources will be utilized to provide additional professional development for teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, and administrators. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). To provide a smooth transition to elementary school, we demystify kindergarten and build pleasant anticipation by planning visits and joint class activities. A favorite activity is to invite kindergarten students to be interviewed in the PreK classroom. We conduct parent workshops and classroom tours to help families prepare. Pre-Kindergarten teachers participate in teacher team meetings to ensure a thorough understanding of kindergarten requirements to enable them to adequately prepare students. In addition, PreK participates in the school-wide Action 100 program whereby parents and children develop regular reading habits that are consistent with kindergarten expectations. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. PS 15 uses varied assessments to inform instruction, including assessment built into curricula, NYCDOE Periodic Assessments, NYS Assessments, MOSL assessments, and teacher created assessments. The process for choosing and/ or developing assessments consists of administrator and teacher team discussions to evaluate the assessment, determine the type of information it provides and its usefulness, and the dependability of the data it provides. Teachers and administrators came to an agreement on the best forms of assessment to meet the needs of the students. Teachers participate in professional development topics such as how to analyze data and how to use the data to inform instruction. In addition, through the Renewal School Program, mandated assessments are provided and utilized as diagnostic, summative, and formative data sources. Model Teachers and our School Instructional Council are leveraged to make school-wide decisions, provide professional development, and guide the school toward meeting it's CEP goals. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 76  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (R-CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) $114,249 x Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal n/a n/a Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5: Rigorous Instruction, part 5B Supportive Environment, part 5B Collaborative Teachers, part 5B Effective School Leadership, part 5B Strong Family and Community Ties, part 5B Section 6: ELT, part 5B n/a 2018-19 CEP-RISE 77  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal n/a 16,514 n/a X Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal n/a n/a 1,454,077 n/a n/a x Tax Levy (FSF) Local n/a Section 5: Rigorous Instruction, part 5B Supportive Environment, part 5B Collaborative Teachers, part 5B Effective School Leadership, part 5B Strong Family and Community Ties, part 5B Section 6: ELT, part 5B n/a n/a Section 5: Rigorous Instruction, part 5B Supportive Environment, part 5B Collaborative Teachers, part 5B Effective School Leadership, part 5B Strong Family and Community Ties, part 5B Section 6: ELT, part 5B 2018-19 CEP-RISE 78  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/R-CEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 79   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 80  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current R-CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 15 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS15 will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 81  The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    2018-19 CEP-RISE 82 Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. PS15 School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 15 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act.(ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 2018-19 CEP-RISE 83  Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by:     creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 84   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with theElementary and Secondary Education Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act and Title I programs; 2. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child   III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities:       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 85  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Manhattan District 01 School Name Roberto Clemente Elementary School School Number 15 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Irene Sanchez Coach - ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Teacher/Subject Area - Teacher/Subject Area - Related-Service Provider - Superintendent - Assistant Principal Laura Salmon Coach - School Counselor Francis Solis Parent Christina Hernandez Parent Coordinator Lanette Murphy Field Support Center Staff Member - Other (Name and Title) - C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 162 2018-19 CEP-RISE 86 Total number of ELLs 16 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.88%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Fountas & Pinnel and the Action100 IRLA are used to determine independent and instructional reading levels. Fountas & Pinnel is administered at the beginning and end of year, and the IRLA is used continuously throughout the year. These assessment instruments provide information about reading accuracy, fluency and comprehension that are immediately used for intervention and/or acceleration of learning. IRLA data is available online, and allows for tracking of student progress across school years. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 87  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ENL program by the yearly NYSESLAT scores, state test scores, 100 Book Challenge levels and steps, F&P reading levels, oral participation and pre and post on-demand writing samples, unit content and vocabulary/spelling assessments. The success of parent involvement is measured by parent participation rates in activities such as: field trips, workshops and meetings 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] PS 15 delivers Tier 1 classroom-based high quality instruction for all students with differentiation to meet the needs of ELLs and other students. Continual formative assessment in ELA ensures that growth and achievement over time is tracked. This data is accessible to teachers through an online database as well as on a data wall in the principal’s office. A math data wall also shows achievement and progress over time and is continuously updated using curriculum-embedded unit assessments. When assessment indicates that student achievement is below expected levels, actions plans are created and students are scheduled for Tier 2 support. Tier 2 students are seen individually or in small groups with focused learning targets. Sessions take place at least twice per conferring cycle. The extra support typically takes place in the classroom, but can also include pull-out services. If progress continues to be delayed, students qualify for Tier 3 support, which is more intensive. Tier 3 students are seen three times within a conferring cycle. Tier 2 and Tier 3 instruction takes into consideration ELLs’ language needs and relies upon research-based intervention strategies. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. According to the 2015 NYSESLAT data, 3 students tested out of ELL status but will continue to receive support for the next 2 years. 3 students made noteworthy progress, advancing from beginning to expanding (2) and transitioning (1). 4 students remained at the same level and will receive extra support in the coming year to ensure they progress as much as their peers. Overall, these test results indicate a strong program and we will continue to implement our successful strategies. In addition, more time will be devoted to reading comprehension, drawing conclusions, writing and task completion strategies to ensure our students are college and career ready. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ENL program will meet all mandates of CR-154. Entering and Emerging students will receive 180 minutes of Stand-Alone ENL provided by the certified ESOL teacher and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL provided by the ESOL and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 88  the Common Branch teacher. Transitioning students will receive 90 minutes of Integrated service provided by the ESOL teacher and the Common Branch teacher. They will also receive 90 mintues of Stand-Alone ENL service provided by the ESOL teacher. Expanding students will receive 180 minutes of Integrated service provided by the ESOL teacher and the Common Branch teacher. All Commanding students will receive 90 minutes of Integrated Service provided by the ESOL teacher and the Common Branch teacher. All Integrated ENL will be heterogeneous groups within the same grade level. All Stand Alone ENL groups will be homogenous, but will only include two consequetive grade levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL program will meet all mandates of CR-154. Entering and Emerging students will receive 180 minutes of Stand-Alone ENL provided by the certified ESOL teacher and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL provided by the ESOL and the Common Branch teacher. Transitioning students will receive 90 minutes of Integrated service provided by the ESOL teacher and the Common Branch teacher. They will also recive 90 mintues of Stand-Alone ENL service provided by the ESOL teacher. Expanding students will receive 180 minutes of Integrated service provided by the ESOL teacher and the Common Branch teacher. All Commanding students will receive 90 minutes of Integrated Service provided by the ESOL teacher and the Common Branch teacher. Since there is only a Free-Standing ENL program, 25 percent of support time will be used for HLA in the Entering and Emerging. HLA will still be used in the higher proficiency levels, but to an even lesser degree. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The Integrated ENL will be taught throught the SIOP model. The ESOL and the Common Branch teacher will collboratively lesson plan to meet the needs of all the students in the classroom. The ESOL teacher will provide the scaffolds to meet the needs of the ELLs during the lesson. This could include any of the following: adapted readings, words glossaries in their home language, descriptive charts, translations and visuals. The ESOL and the Common Branch teacher will deliver the lesson as a team. The ESOL teacher will use the Stand-Alone ENL time to deliver explicit instrustion based on the Common Core Language Standards and the needs of the students and will base these lessons on the content learned in class. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Children that are identified to have Spanish as a home language and qualify for services are also given the Spanish-LAB. Throughout the school year 25 percent of service time is spent on HLA. Translations and interpretations are used in the classroom to assist the ELLs. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Paste response to questions here: a.Sife 2018-19 CEP-RISE 89  To meet the needs of SIFE students PS15 builds a supportive environment that responds to the social, cultural and linguistic needs of all students. In the classroom lessons are taught through the SIOP model. This helps to build on their prior knowledge and provides scaffolds throughout the lesson. The classrooms are also print rich environments with lots of visuals, while new vocabulary is slowly introduced. Students are lead through a hand-on learning experience so that the students are physically involved in their learning. Students are given many chances to communicate through whatever means they feel comfortable: speaking, drawing, acting, miming or hand gestures. Students are also encouraged to communicate in their preferred language with any staff and students who also know that language b. Newcomer Newcomers are also met with a supportive environment that meets the students’ social, cultural and linguistic needs. Newcomers will receive 180 minutes of Integrated service following the SIOP model. The home language and visuals will be incorporated into the lessons. New students will be paired with a buddy to ensure a positive social adjustment. Newcomers will also receive 180 minutes of Stand-Alone ENL. This service time will focus on teaching the fundamentals: foundations, vocabulary and simple sentence structures. A large portion of the service time will be spent on building oral language. c.Developing Developing students will receive a combination of Integrated and Stand-Alone service. Building oral language will continue to be a focus. There will also be an emphasis on speaking, asking and answering questions. The complexity of the language will gradually increase as the students’ levels also increase. Interpretations will be used when needed to allow students to think at higher cognitive levels even if they can’t yet communicate in English at the same level. d. Long Term To meet the needs of Long Term ELLs a full evaluation of the student will take place. Data on the student will be collected and evaluated by the ESOL and classroom teacher. IEPs, state test scores and running records will all be assessed to see where the students are struggling and determine the needs of the students. The ESOL teacher and the classroom teacher will create an action plan together to help the students succeed. e. Former Ells up to two years after existing ELL status Former ELLs will receive Integrated service. The ESOL teacher and the classroom teacher will plan together and co-teach to ensure the needs of the students are being met. Running records will be assessed to make sure the students are progressing on track. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? PS 15 uses many instructional strategies to provide access to content for our ELLs. Content word walls, videos, photos, manipulatives, Social Studies through the arts, bilingual textbooks (math), and picture dictionaries are used in classrooms to scaffold content. Teachers also use graphic organizers and sentence frames to allow students to organize and produce language pertaining to content. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All students at PS15 with an IEP are placed in an ICT classroom. This setting allows them to have both a special education teacher and the common branch teacher. The teachers collaborate to meet the needs of the students. Each student’s IEP is carefully read and taken into consideration during the planning process. The classroom teachers also collaborate with the Speech Therapist, OT and ESOL teacher so that the group can act as a team to meet the needs of the student. Interventions might include: focused work on skills including reading comprehension, decoding, writing, and math skills. Wilson is used with certain students. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 90  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs who are required to take the ELA exams will receive small group instruction to prepare for the test format. Instruction will be driven to encompass reading comprehension skills and writing mechanics, as well as test-taking strategies to prepare students for state exams. All ELLs and former ELLs from the previous two years will receive Integrated ENL in content areas. All ELLs in Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning levels will also receive Stand-Alone ENL instruction. Teachers work in inquiry groups based on grade level. Many ELLS are chosen to be involved as a focused intervention. Each grade level picks a different inquiry, which may be related to math-based writing, reading, Foundations, or vocabulary skills. Teachers share their inquiries and finding at school wide inquiry group meetings. Extended learning time is provided everyday for in Literacy and Mathematics and Enrichment programs, which focuses on developing foundational skills in literacy, writing, and math. It is offered to all students across the grade levels. Speech-Language therapy is an intervention program used at PS 15 and citywide. Speech—Language therapy is provided to both ELL students and native English speakers. Most mandate speech students at PS 15 receive therapy 2-3 times a week for 30-minute sessions. Speech—Language therapy targets all modes of communication. Some of the skills addressed in Speech—Language therapy include speaking, articulation, listening, auditory comprehension, and interpersonal communication, use of meaningful gestures, reading and writing. Some ELL students are entitled to Speech—Language therapy in their native language. Mandated language for Speech—Language therapy is always indicated on the student’s IEP. As of September 2011, all PS 15 speech students receive therapy in English. Speech—Language therapy for ELL students tends to vary based on native language proficiency, age/grade level and underlying disability. Several of our students, including ELLs, receive counseling from a bilingual guidance counselor who supports them with emotional and behavioral problems. Intervention is provided to those at risk of failing. Counseling is provided to both students and family members by a social worker and a school psychologist. We express high expectations for these students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The school is in the process of implementing many changes. This year the school is using the Teacher’s College Reading and Writing program for all grades. In addition, the Kindergarten marks the beginning of the school’s transitioning into a Renzulli School. This year reading comprehension and writing is a focus in the ESL program. Upper grade students are required to write a essays for the ELA and the NYSELSLAT. We have seen from past scores that the reading and writing modalities are the areas where the students are not meeting proficient levels. To close this gap the focus will be on building oral language comprehension, increasing critical thinking, reading comprehension, vocabulary and writing skills. For the lower grades building oral language comprehension, language analysis skills such as phonemic awareness, syllable counting and rhyming will be seamlessly integrated into the curriculum. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? To meet the requirements outlined in CR-154 the school will no longer just offer pull-out ENL service. All ELLs and former ELLs from the previous two years will receive Integrated ENL service. All Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning will also receive Stand-Alone ENL in addition to Integrated ENL service. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 91  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. The Language Access Coordinator has implemented a plan to meet the translations needs for the LEP families at the school. All staff is given an action plan which includes: a list of all LEP families and their preferred language of communication, list of bilingual staff members, links to print notes home in multiple languages, a service that translates letters home and a contact for over the phone translations. All school programs are announced through multiple mediums. Head teachers inform students in the classrooms. Letters are sent home to the parents and translations are provided for all those that request communication in another language besides English. All programs are also announced on the school website and sent out to emails through school blasts. The ENL teacher is available after school hours most days for those ELLs who want extra tutoring. ELLs also receive additional support through extended learning time 5 days a week. Reading materials in first languages are available for afterschool free reading. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We are using many instructional materials to support the learning of our ELLs. Classroom libraries include fiction and non-fiction leveled books. A variety of group sets are available. Native Language materials are provided to students, who are literate in their native language. Fundations is used in the lower grades to teach pronunciation, phonics, and spelling. TCWRP, 100 Book Challenge, FOSS Science and the Terc Investigations Math program are used in all classrooms as standard curriculum. The 100 book challenge provides extensive materials including individual skills cards for each child, incentives for extending time for on-task reading, and highly targeted action planning and instruciton. The computer lab and library provide teachers access to a variety of programs and materials. The Smartboard Notebook program provides visual aids and interactive learning to ELLs. All classrooms have Smartboards. Students have access to various applications on iPads to support teaching and learning. Reading A-Z provides teacher resources to find books on the level of each child. In addition, all students have access to MyOn, an online database of reading books at all levles. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? PS 15 is using a Free-standing ENL program where students receive instruction 99% of the time in English. The ENL teacher could use Spanish with some low-level ELLs to guide understanding, but generally native language is reserved for newcomers and beginners to allow them to feel comfortable in a new environment. Books are provided in native languages in the library and the classroom for ELLs. Picture dictionaries and dual language dictionaries are also available for ELLs as a reference. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The RLAT report from ATS provides the grade level and proficiency level of every ELL. All teachers of ELLS will be given the test scores so that they are aware of the proficiency levels. ELL students receive Integrated service according to their grade level. The amount of service is mandated by the student’s English proficiency level. The ESOL and the classroom teachers design their lessons using the SIOP model. Every lesson will have a content objective and a language objective. The teachers work together to add in the scaffolds for the different levels of ELLS and SWD. The ESOL teacher analyzes the four modalities of the NYSESLAT to determine where each student needs additional support. Targeted intervention is provided during the Stand-Alone ENL time. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 92  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are using many instructional materials to support the learning of our ELLs. Classroom libraries include fiction and non-fiction leveled books. A variety of group sets are available. Native Language materials are provided to students, who are literate in their native language. Fundations is used in the lower grades to teach pronunciation, phonics, and spelling. TCWRP, 100 Book Challenge, FOSS Science and the Terc Investigations Math program are used in all classrooms as standard curriculum. The 100 book challenge provides extensive materials including individual skills cards for each child, incentives for extending time for on-task reading, and highly targeted action planning and instruciton. The computer lab and library provide teachers access to a variety of programs and materials. The Smartboard Notebook program provides visual aids and interactive learning to ELLs. All classrooms have Smartboards. Students have access to various applications on iPads to support teaching and learning. Reading A-Z provides teacher resources to find books on the level of each child. In addition, all students have access to MyOn, an online database of reading books at all levles. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). If available, the ENL teacher or the Parent Coordinator assists newly enrolled students by giving tours of the building and if possible introduces the students to their new teacher. Parent meeting are available with the Parent Coordinator to answer any questions the students or parents may have. Once school starts, the ELL students join the newcomer group to learn about the school. Native language resources are distributed to their classrooms and a listening center is put in their classrooms. There is a Back to School BBQ that all families are invited to attend. This night is a nice, informal way for families to connect and have an informal introduction to the teachers. Curriculum night in September is also a good way for parents and students to sit down with each teacher to discuss programming. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? PS 15 is a primary school and therefore does not offer language electives. All classes are offered in English. Students receive technology, science, and gym outside of their regular scheduled classroom time as well as various arts classes such as dance, music, visual arts, and theatre that intergrate the curriculum in the classes. Some mandated ENL students receive Speech-Language Therapy, OT and/or counseling. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 93  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teacher attends monthly meetings that are run by an English Language Learners Specialist. A large portion of these meetings is devoted to assessing the alignment of ENL teacher’s curriculum to the common core standards. This specialist is in constant contact with the ENL teacher providing even more dates for professional developments through the DOE. The Office of DELLS also offers opportunities for professional development. In addition to ELL PD, the ENL teacher participates in content areas PD with all classroom teachers every Monday and Tuesday morning which include topics on Universal Design for Learning, CCSS, Questioning and Discussion Techniques, and Enhanicing Rigor in the Classroom. He will also participate in Renzulli training throuhgout the school year. In addition, PD is provided on Social-Emotional learning through SOAR, a PD offered by P2L that helps teachers identify their own triggers and emotions in order to better support students. The ENL teacher works with three teachers that serve as mentors for him. Together, they review curricular plans and discuss the ailignemnt with the CCSS. In addition, every Monday and Tuesday morning the ENL teacher participates in PD with all classroom teachers and PD is offered on the CCSS. The ENL teacher meets with classroom teachers at meetings and has open communication about student progress through email and sharing documents and assessments. The staff of PS15, including the principal, classroom teachers and paraprofessionals are invited to attend ENL professional developments. Professional development is conducted by the ENL teacher at PS15 on how to provide effective scaffolding for ELLs, and on how to differentiate instruction to align with students’ prior knowledge and/or learning and language needs. Together teachers gather information from test samples to align instruction based on the required skills for their level. All staff members at PS15 meet for inquiry once a week. In addition to these weekly meetings, all staff members including the guidance counselors and the parent coordinator attend professional developments in.. A primary focus of these meetings is to evaluate our methods of teaching according to the standards. Teachers are encouraged to attend offsite workshops provided by the UFT, TESOL and BETAC. All staff members including guidance counselors and the parent coordinator attend all professional developments. Lastly, the ENL teacher participats in teacher teams designed to identify CCSS within our curriculum and determine what students must know and understand in order to produce the outcomes listed in the CCSS. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In the fall ELL parents receive information in their home language on choices for Middle Schools in their neighborhood. They are also ushered to Middle School Fairs held in the evenings. Our Spanish speaking Guidance Counselor and Chinese Paraprofessional visit the fifth grade classes, informing the students of the importance of going to these fairs and encourage them to persuade their parents to attend the fairs at various schools. On a specific evening we escort parents from PS15 to a Middle School Fair. Translators accompany the group. This all happens before applications are due for Middle Schools. Each May, students receive a notice of acceptance to one of the schools of their choice. Letters are sent in the parents' preferred language. At the end of the year, we encourage our students to visit the school where they received their acceptance. Many times the fifth grade teachers arrange a group visit. To meet the mandate of 50% of PD be ELL related, the ESOL teacher is encouraged to attend professional development outside of the school. Professional development is offered through the ELL specialists, The Office of DELLS and the NYSTESOL. The ESOL teacher, classroom teachers and administration work together to find what areas classroom teachers need assistance meeting the needs of ELLs. The ESOL teacher then creates and leads professional development based on the school’s need to 2018-19 CEP-RISE 94  ensure all staff meets the 15% requirement. A reflection form is filled out for each PD. Every teacher has a PD binder to store these forms, and a copy is placed in a binder in the main office. Teachers also use the PD form from the state to track hours. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ESOL teacher arranges to meet with all parents of ELLs for a meeting to discuss individual progress. Parents are invited to come in for a meeting by phone. The ESOL teacher uses a team of fellow teachers to act as interpreters. If a parent is unreachable by phone, then a translated letter is sent home. If there is still no response, then a letter with a return receipt is mailed. The ESOL teacher uses the chart from the EPIC toolkit to track all meetings and communications with ELL parents. Since PS15 has a small ELL population the ESOL teacher is able to regularly reach out to the parents to report progress during the Wednesday Parent Involvement time too. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. P.S. 15 has a welcoming parent coordinator, a parent resource room and a PTA room where parent are encouraged to use the computers and find information on local services. Up-to-date school information is posted online so that parents are aware of what is happening in our school and what their choices are with regard to various programs offered at P.S. 15 and in their community. Parents are encouraged to visit classrooms and share their cultures through songs and food. P.S. 15 to visit classrooms and share their cultures through songs and food. P.S. 15 has parent volunteers who help the Parent Coordinator with activities such as “Blessings in a Backpack.” The PTA currently has about 26 active parents, and the school is committed to increasing that number during the 2015-2016 school year. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 95 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Irene Sanchez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 96  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS15 School DBN: 01M015 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Irene Sanchez Title Principal Laura Salmon Assistant Principal La'Nette Murphy Parent Coordinator Wesley Moody Jr. ENL/Bilingual Teacher Christina Hernandez Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 11/5/15 11/5/15 11/5/15 11/5/15 11/5/15 11/5/15 11/5/15 11/5/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP-RISE 97  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 01M015 School Name: Roberto Clemente Elementary School Superintendent: D. Phillips The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At PS15, during the registration process for new students, special care is taken to ascertain what language parents would like to communicate with the school in, both orally and in writing. This information is recorded on the HLIS and on student emergency contact cards and it is input in ATS. Preferred langauge is recorded for all adults that the school may be in contact with concerning a student (grandparents, aunt, uncle, etc.) In addition, communication between the parent coordinator, the language access coordinator and families also provide more information to ensure all families’ needs are met. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 98 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language According to the RAPL report in ATS, 25 parents at PS15 prefer to receive oral communication in Spanish and 26 prefer written communication in Spanish. Additionally, 4 prefer oral communication in Chinese (Mandarin) and 4 prefer written communication in Mandarin. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. In September, the school disseminates the annual handbook, emergency blue cards and curriculum night information. Throughout the year the school sends out notifications reminding families of vacations and half days. Teachers send monthly newsletters to parents. Parents are invited to come into the school for parent-teacher conferences. Letters are sent home in the spring to make parents aware of upcoming state testing. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 99  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? PS 15 will have three parent-teacher conferences and one curriculum night. The ENL teacher will have additional one-on-one meetings with all ELL parents to discuss academic growth and needs. The attendance monitor calls home to check on children that are absent. Teachers use the parent involvement time to call, text, or email parents and discuss the student’s academic performance. Guidance Counselors call home to discuss incidents and social-emotional needs. Parents will come in for IEP meetings. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Section VII of the Chancellor's Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services is fulfilled by providing families with paper copies of the Parents’ Bill of Rights, Achieve NYC Guide and the Parent Guide to Language Access in their preferred language. The Language Access Coordinator receives the welcoming poster and language guides for security and ensures everything is in place. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 100  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Language Access Coordinator has created a parent survey that has been translated to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of the services. Parents will fill out this survey each time they come in for a meeting. Also, periodically throughout the year another translated survey will be sent home to gather feedback on the quality of translated documents being sent home. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 101 
