 01M020 School Name: P.S. 020 ANNA SILVER Principal: SARAH PINTO VIAGRAN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Anna Silver School 310100010020 Pre K-5 166 Essex Street 212- 254-9577 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 01M020 212-254-3526 Fax: Sarah Pinto spinto4@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Sarah Pinto Rosemary Siders Ally Neznamy Paul Crackler Maria Acevedo none Tiffany Rodriguez (Henry Street Settlement) CBO Representative: Geographical District: 01 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Carry Chan Superintendent: 166 Essex Street NY NY 10002 cchan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-353-2948 Phone Number: 212-254-3526 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Ave NY, NY, 10011 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-356-7564 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Sarah Pinto Rosemary Siders Ruth Wong Phillip Rivera Maria Acevedo None None Tiffany Rodriguez Paul Crackler Christine Drago *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ PTA- Chairperson Member/UFT Member/ UFT delegate   Kristen Nelson XiomaraLanza Helga Yan Larsen Maria Acevedo PaulCrackler Sharon Stapel Ally Neznamy AkeliaLawrence Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ PTA Member/ PTA Member/ PTA Member/PTA Member/ PTA Member/ PTA   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The PS 20 vision is for all of us to deepen our understanding of the following four seeds and help them to grow every day: Wellness, Cultural Intelligence, Clarity and Precision, and Innovation Together we will: Be Well - Making choices toward a healthy and fulfilling life,   Be Culturally Intelligent - Learning from multiple perspectives and growing in our understanding of others Be Clear and Precise - Thinking and communicating accurately, and supporting our thinking with evidence, Be Innovative - Inciting curiosity, collaborative problem solving, and independent thinking. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 20 is an un-zoned school located in the historic Lower East Side of Manhattan. Our 500 students come from several parts of the world and speak 14 different languages. We serve 19% English as New Language Learners (ENL) and 23% Students with disabilities. Our population is composed of 33% Asian, 10% African American, 49% Hispanic and 4% White. We have 2 Dual language programs, one in Mandarin from Pre K to 5 th grade and a Dual Language Spanish program from Pre K to 2nd grade. Wellness  Wellness in the Schools (WITS)  Asphalt Green Recess Enrichment Program  Wellness Week & Annual Health Fair   After school Intramural Clubs -Nike Marathon Running Club, Girls on the Run, PS 20 Sports Club Sustainability initiatives Cultural Intelligence Family Diversity Committee  Race & Equity Team   Dual Language Programs  Art Residencies: Ajna Indian Dance, National Dance Institute, Turtle Bay Music School, Rosie's Broadway Kids, Paul Taylor Dance Clarity & Precision  Reading & Writing Project School (Columbia University)  EngageNY Math Curriculum  Restorative Circles (Social Emotional Learning)   Student Council School Newspaper Innovation Language Classes for all students   Habits of Mind Curriculum  Computer Science For All  Coding Instruction  Gardening Initiative  Sustainability systems 1. Students with Disabilities (SWD) have been mainstreamed into a least restrictive environment (LRE), through specific academic content areas (i.e. math, reading, writing, social studies) and specialty classes to support social 0  emotional needs (i.e. Physical Education, Technology, Art, Music, Science and Library). With support from our Student Intervention Team (SIT), flexible programming is utilized to support individual academic needs. 2. Horizontal grade planning and vertical planning is used to align curriculum, differentiate instruction, and share best practices. 3. The school has increased the number of health and wellness activities for students and families, such as an annual health fair, Family Fitness night, and Wellness Week. In addition, the school collaborates with a local Health Clinic to provide free flu shots for our community, language classes for parents, and cooking workshops during night and weekend events. 4. We have now used Teachers College Reading and Writing Curriculum Units of Study for 3 full years. The school has aligned literacy instruction with the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and have begun shifting to Next Generation Learning Standards. 5. We worked closely with math staff developers from Math in the City to implement critical thinking skills in mathematics and deepen discussion around problem solving. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PS 20 supports several student populations:  72% of students are District 1 residents while 28% of our students come from out of district  3% of students are in Temporary Housing  19% of students are English Language Learners  23% of students are Students with Disabilities PS 20 has a full time Occupational Therapist, 3 Speech & Language Therapists (1 bilingual Mandarin), Guidance Counselor, Physical Therapist. Our school also hosts 2 Dual Language programs, free standing and integrated ENL services to support our ENL community of students. During the hiring process, PS 20 considers the importance of multilingual staff members to support our community. Our staff speak English, Spanish, Russian, Mandarin, Cantonese, and Bengali. In addition, PS 20 partners with Henry Street Settlement Mental Health Clinic, which offers Mental Health services to both students and families. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. As stated on the most recent Quality Review, "Administrators give detailed feedback to teachers by capturing their strengths and indicating support with suggested examples for their instructional growth. In the teacher meeting, teachers stated that feedback is clear and purposeful with concrete examples for improvement. This year, teachers are continuing to focus on questioning and discussion techniques, as well as data driven instruction. Through ongoing focused observations and follow-up support, supervisors have developed a cycle of continual improvement where feedback is specific, evidence-based, actionable, and timely." It also stated, "School leaders strategically use data from observations and the Danielson Framework to provide meaningful feedback to teachers and to foster professional growth, thus leading to improved teaching practice." In the 2017-2018 Learning Survey, 95% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader makes clear to staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals. 1  2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 01M020 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 497 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 41 41 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 19 15 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 72.0% % Attendance Rate 70.2% % Reduced Lunch 17.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 53.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.09 2% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 39.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 77% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 63 61 92.4% 0.4% 22.9% 10.3% 29.6% 3.8% 2 18% 9.4 35.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A NO N/A N/A NO N/A YES N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Implementation of the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project literacy curriculum has continued into it's 3 year. PS 20 has created alignment across gradewide classrooms. Teachers, schoolwide, have normed literacy assessments and used data to drive and revise literacy instruction. Teachers have differentiated instruction in literacy using small group, 1:1 conferencing, and whole group shared literacy experiences. Each grade team has worked on revising and shifting curriculum in both Mathematics and Social Studies over the last year. Social Studies has been integrated into Literacy Units of Study. In addition to student work protocols, assessment analysis, grade teams each engage in Inquiry Work around Literacy. Some Inquiry Team cycles have resulted in schoolwide phonic and word work and expectations. Based on the analysis of end of year results of the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project running records and assessment data, there were a large number of students who are 2 or more reading levels below grade level benchmarks. In addition, letter/sound recognition and Words Their Way spelling inventories show a percentage of lower grade students who are struggling with decoding. Additional support in reading intervention is still needed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through alignment of TCRWP literacy Units of Study and components of balanced literacy, 25% of students in grades Kindergarten through 5th grade who are reading below benchmark reading level will increase by more then one year of progress (5 reading levels A-L, 3 reading levels M-Z), as measured by TCRWP running records. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will participate in norming running records in English, Chinese, and Spanish 2 times throughout the year during grade meetings, vertical program planning, and professional development time. Implement Fundations in all K-2nd grade classrooms as a Tier 1 support. Implement Words Their Way in all 3rd-5th grade classrooms. Fundations will be used in upper grades as needed to support students behind grade level in small group during Reading Workshop . All teachers will receive training in Fundations & WTW by end of year. Staff developers from the Reading and Writing Project will offer literacy support to all teachers for 10 days a year. Staff developers will focus on improving equity and access of resources in all classrooms. Calendar days from the Reading and Writing project will be offered to all teachers. Selected calendar days will target additional supports for Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners and Culturally Responsive Educational Practices. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept.-June Administration, grade team leaders Teachers, Students Sept.-June Administration, Model Teachers Teachers Sept.-June Administrators, Staff developers Teachers Oct. - May Administrators, Staff developers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will offer an ELA curriculum night which will introduce families to Next Generation Standards, engage families in activities that can be used at home such as independent reading prompts and supports and writing strategies. The last Friday of every month, classrooms will be open for families to observe and participate in ELA 5  instruction with their child in the classroom. The staff and PTA will engage in homework norming to ensure all students are receiving appropriate literacy homework to support their needs. The Race & Equity team will meet with families 4 times a year to begin conversations around Equity in Literacy at PS 20. The family group will be utilizing the book, Courageous Conversations about Race by Glenn Singleton and examining the disproportionately of students of color reading below grade level. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Intervention teachers both full time and part time will use a Universal Screening process and referral process to support small groups of students as Tier 2 supports. Intervention will include both push in and pull out services on a daily basis to support students more then 2 levels behind grade level. Additionally an ENL will push in or pull out to support at risk students who need additional language supports. Classroom teachers (K, 1, 2) will implement Fundations each morning as part of their morning meeting or in small group during Reading Workshop. The first period of the day will be designated for intervention, which will include but is not limited to trained paraprofessionals using Reading Rescue, out of classroom teachers such as SETSS, ENL, and other service providers working with small groups of students (3-4 students per group) in grades 1, 2 and 3) to provide guided reading instruction. This intervention will be provided at least three times a week to the targeted students in grades 1-5. Support staff- SETTS, ENL teachers and service providers’ will provide mandated services as indicated on Individual Education Plans (IEP). Substitutes will be hired in order for teachers and paraprofessionals to attend Reading Rescue, Teacher College Calendar Days, and internal TCRWP Staff development days. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, students will have moved 3 reading levels, or an equivalent of 3/4th of a years progress as evidenced by running record levels (accuracy rate for decoding, comprehension questions, sequential retell). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) TCRWP running records, letter/sound assessment, concept of print, and high frequency word assessment, will be used to monitor students progress in reading. These assessments will be administered a minimum of 6 times a year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? PS 20 has shown improvement in creating a supportive environment during the 2017-2018 school year as evidenced by the learning survey, Advance observation data, and family feedback. All teachers are now trained in Restorative Circles, Emotionally Responsive Practices and/or Life Crisis School Intervention. The school has established a crisis de-escalation process and crisis team. Teachers have created Tier 1 supports for Social Emotional needs and learning in classrooms. The school began the process of creating a PBIS matrix and has sent staff members to team training. The PBIS matrix aligns to the school's vision which was created during the 2017-2018 school year. The Matrix includes, Be Well, Be Culturally Intelligent, Be Clear and Precise, and Be Innovative. According to data in the 2017-2018 Environmental Learning Survey, 90% of teachers participated, making the data more accurate then family participation. Within the Supportive Environment section of the Learning Survey, Social Emotional section was rated 80% which is 10% below the district average and 6% below the citywide average. The data showed that only 71% of teachers said that adults at their school have access to school-based supports to assist in behavioral and emotional escalations. In addition, only 74% of teachers said that adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior (by focusing their attention, controlling their emotions, or managing their thinking, behavior, and feelings). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will see a 10 percentage increase in the supportive environment section of the school quality guide learning survey. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. o Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  All teachers will receive training in Positive Behavioral Intervention Supports, as turn keyed by the PBIS Team. Teachers, students Sept.-June Administration, PBIS team  All classrooms will implement a schoolwide PBIS matrix, which aligns to the school vision. Class agreements will align to matrix, utilizing identical language in all classrooms. Students Nov.-June Administration, Teachers A Behavioral Child Study team (Tier 2/3) will support individual students and families in need using data to set short and long term goals. The team will meet bimonthly and provide professional development to individual teachers or whole staff as needed. Family Workshops will be offered once a month, which may include but is not limited to, workshops around Mental Health, Special Education services and rights, Response to Intervention structure and services, Child development, and nutritional support. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students Sept. - June Administration, IEP teacher, PBIS Team Families Oct. -June Parent Coordinator, PTA, Administration, Henry St. Settlement CBO How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Provide a PBIS workshop for families and present intervention and citywide discipline expectations (discipline code) lessons/trainings into classrooms and family meetings/workshops to ensure clear understanding and expectations for students and parents. Incorporate a welcome orientation practice/support for new incoming and transferred students and parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Substitute teachers will cover teachers while receiving needed training. In addition, funding will be used to purchase resources such as texts aligned to teach matrix. Per session will be offered to the PBIS team to continue building and progress monitoring of implementation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January of 2019, there will be an increase of 10% improvement on Q21g and Q21h from the school quality guide, as evidenced by a school created survey for staff members. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORs reports, SLT surveys, and Learning Survey results Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers collaborate and take part in different grade level teams and share their learning with colleagues. Our grade level teacher teams meet weekly, during common planning time to discuss learning trends in the classroom. Teachers discuss and plan best practices in instruction and have professional discussions related to diverse topics. For example: Looking at student work in the area of writing to analyze trends (strengths and needs). During this time, teachers meet to plan curriculum and/or study student work that will inform instruction and an alignment of curriculum across grade levels. Grade Team leaders receive bi-monthly professional development with the assistant principal, which includes modeling of best practices in facilitating an efficient meeting and messaging of school goals. Additionally, teachers participate in monthly staff development sessions with a staff developer from Teachers College Reading and Writing project (TCRWP). They have opportunities to attend off-site calendar days at Columbia University or through inter- or intra-visitation. In addition, vertical planning within programs (e.g. dual language (Spanish/Mandarin), Integrated Co-Teaching Model (ICTM), Self Contained teachers, General Education teachers (K-3), upper grade math planning and Specialty teachers occur once a month to support vertical alignment. A member of the administrative cabinet attends each of the meetings, relaying information back once a month for next steps or needed supports. Additional time to meet with teachers and administration is required to create alignment of instructional practices across the school. While teaching practices and curriculum are aligned throughout the grades, a means and time line for collecting school wide writing data is not well established. Writing data is collected by grade teams or by individual teachers to support student growth, however a system for the school to collect data must be implemented to make meaningful, data driven decisions around supporting our students in writing. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 70% of all students (K-5) will attain grade level writing benchmarks as evidenced by the Writing Pathways grade level assessment aligned to the Writing Continuum. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will administer a pre and post assessment for all writing Units of Study. Grade Teams will use student work to norm assessments across classrooms after each writing Unit of Study. Teachers Oct. -June Administration, Grade Team Leaders Teachers will engage in Inquiry Teams twice a month using data to revise and shift instruction around writing. Teachers will submit assessment for writing a minimum of 4 times a year using the Writing Pathways Continuum grade level benchmarks. The administrative cabinet will analyze school wide data for next steps and needed supports. Administration will attend grade meetings twice a month to monitor progress.  Use G Drive as a vehicle to collect writing assessment data a a minimum of 4 times a year. Using the data to make school wide instructional shifts for students needs, especially English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Teachers Oct.-June Administration, Teachers Students Sept.-June Teachers, Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will offer weekly Workshops or a “night event” designed to message out expectations and systems to families. In addition, writing goals and a break down of benchmarks will be posted and updated on class websites (grade specific) and the school website. 1  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Substitute teachers who will cover teachers during professional development opportunities. Funding will also be used to purchase necessary assessment materials such as the Writing Pathways Book for all teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 50% of students will be performing at grade level using the Writing Pathways Continuum grade level benchmarks. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student work will be analyzed using the Unit of Study pre and post on demand assessments from the Writing Pathways grade level benchmarks. All assessments will be translated in both Spanish and Chinese for Dual Language Programs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the last Quality Review in 2016-2017, Effective Leadership was given a proficient rating and was also named the school's "Area of Celebration." When looking at the 2016-2017 learning survey, 91% of teachers trusted the principal at her word. In the 2017-2018 learning survey, 69% of teachers trust the principal at her word. This is 11% below district average and 8% below city average. We recognize that it is essential for the principal to work in true partnership with school staff, teachers and parents. Further, because of the institutional role played by a principal, they must have a “natural” mandate to create the conditions for such a partnership, and lead by positive example and encouragement of school staff, teachers, parents and students. The principal and assistant principal are visible at arrival and dismissal and have an open door policy for families. In addition, the administration has utilized the Danielson Framework of Teaching to provide targeted feedback to teachers which has improved instructional practice. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will see a 12 percentage increase in the Trust section of the school quality guide learning survey, focusing on components around Principal to Teacher trust and Teacher to Teacher trust. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The principal will conduct non evaluative assessments in addition to evaluative assessments to better understand individual classroom environments. In addition, the principal will offer weekly office hours to create more time for teachers to engage in meaningful conversations about support. Students, Teachers Sept.-Aug Administration The principal will set administrative goals and review goals at each school wide PD session and weekly newsletters. The admin goals for this year are: Teachers, Students Sept.-Aug Administration, Parent Coordinator  Reduce scheduling changes   Increase communication and transparency with staff Support Family Engagement outside big events Professional development for staff members will integrate opportunities for staff to learn about each other. Intervisitation will be used to open classrooms to each other. Some PD opportunities are the following: Teachers, Students Sept. -Aug Administration, Teachers, Race & Equity Team, Wellness Council  Health and Wellness will be an integral theme creating opportunities for teachers to support each other in individual Wellness Goals  During Race & Equity Conversations, Staff will learn about each others cultural and racial stories and the impact they have on themselves and better understanding their students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 4  Families will have monthly Q & A sessions after Family Fridays to learn updates about school initiatives. Families are encouraged to join the Wellness Council and Race & Equity Teams. A weekly email (newsletter) will be sent out to families communicating upcoming events or instructional approaches to teaching. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monday Professional Development time will be used once a month to support Race & Equity conversations. Per Session and Per Diem will be used to support intervisitation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By September 2018, the principal will send home a weekly newsletter communicating expectations to all staff members. By October 2018, the principal would have held at least one one on one meeting with each staff member. By October 2018, the principal will have an established system for office hours. By December 2018, the principal and assistant principal will have visited all classrooms a minimum of one time for non evaluative visit. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In January and June of 2019, the principal will send a mid year admin effectiveness survey to assess and revise personal admin goals. In addition, the school quality guide will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 20’s belief and commitment is to continue to build a stronger bridge between the families and school through ongoing communication and an open door policy. Strengths: Families have many opportunities to participate in meetings and workshops throughout the school year.   We provide informative workshops in literacy and math nights. Encourage healthy eating habits and  movement we celebrate fun filled nights where we encourage healthy eating and active life. Family -Teacher conferences, teachers provide list of resources available to families in NYC to enhance learning.  PS 20's Parent Coordinator schedules school tours for prospective Pre K and Kindergarten families who are interested in learning more about our school programs. Needs: Family engagement has remained at 56% participation and family volunteering in classrooms is minimal. The same small number of parents (8-12 people) attend PTA meetings. Many parents have expressed concern over middle school admissions. Families of Students with Disabilities and multilingual families are under represented at family engagement events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of families will have attended at least two school-wide events and/or initiatives measured by attendance sheets and survey responses. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Class parents will be established in every classroom. One family member will support the teacher and school in messaging information about opportunities or events and supporting classroom daily needs. Communication will include, but not limited to, text messaging, email, social media, paper flyers in Spanish, Chinese, English, and Bengali. Sign in sheets will be utilized at all family workshops to measure progress. Some workshops will include but are not limited to, Parent Language workshops offered in Spanish, Mandarin, and English on a bi-weekly basis throughout the school year, puberty education, mental health education, and curriculum/homework support. A Family Race & Equity team will be created to begin a discussion around equity for all. The team will include stakeholders from all educational programs in the school (i.e. special education, dual language, general education). Bylaws for both the PTA and the SLT will include a mandate to seek out and include families from all PS 20 programs (dual language Mandarin, Spanish, Special Education, General Education, K-5 students.) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Families Sept-June Administration, School Leadership Team, PTA, Families Sept-June Administration, Parent Coordinator, ESL Teachers Families Sept -June Administration, Parent Coordinator Families Sept.-June SLT, PTA If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Henry Street Settlement House After school and Mental Health clinic will support in providing additional family resources aligned to family and student goals/needs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 7  Per session will be offered to teachers for translation and attendance during night activities. A committee of parents, teachers, and administration will be released from teaching to support the writing of the handbook. Therefore the use of Per Diem will be used if not per session during after school planning. Translation funds will be utilized to translate all documents into Chinese, Spanish, and Bengali. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 75% of families will have attended at least one school-wide events or Parent Association meetings as measured by attendance sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets from meetings, school survey participation, response to individual class surveys, Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Running records, Teacher conferences, referral form End of the unit assessments, teacher conferences Student notebooks, tasks, and teacher conferences Social Studies Tasks, teacher conferences Teacher referrals, teacher observations At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Shared reading, read aloud, guided reading, phonemic awareness, Fundations Strategy groups Integrate with literacy instruction to develop literacy skills and content knowledge Integrate with literacy instruction to develop literacy skills and content knowledge Small group/individual counseling, alternative recess Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group instruction, teacher conferences During the school day Small group instruction, teacher conferences Small group instruction, teacher conferences During the school day During the school day Small group instruction, teacher conferences During the school day Small group instruction, teacher conferences During the school day 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 13% of PS 20 population of 504 students are in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students are provided with counseling and small group support. School supplies and books are provided as needed as well as bussing if needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 13% of our population. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0 Additional books, workbooks, and supplies s are provided to support the students in order to complete assignments. Field trips and after school activities are funded by the school. Parents are offered workshops to support housing needs and other essential benefits through various organizations and partnerships. Families are eligible for free flu shots and other health care needs. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $7,000 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● PS 20 strives to retain highly qualified teachers by ensuring that all applicants are interviewed by a hiring committee. They are interviewed by the team with a set of questions. If candidates meet the criteria of the first round, they are asked to return for a demonstration lesson. ● We collaborate with our HR director to ensure that candidates are highly qualified teachers. ● Scheduled built-in common planning time, teacher team meetings, PPT meetings to foster collaboration and continuous learning. ● Provide ongoing professional development within the school, with other schools, CBOs, and outside institutions to meet the different needs of teachers. ● Teachers choose their own professional goals with the principal during Initial Principal's conference (IPC) meeting and at the end of year reflect upon the accomplishment of these goals. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Teacher teams led by the IEP teacher and administrators ● Cycles of professional development based on their instructional goals ● Off-site professional development ● Intervisitation of other schools and within our school are offered to all teachers with a particular lens to support growth. TC staff developers. 2  Math in the City educational consultants MFSC support in the areas of School climate and Special Education Goldmansour & Rutherford educational consultants Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). ● School tours and parent meetings for parents of incoming Kindergarten students will be provided monthly or by appointment ● Pre-K students will visit Kindergarten classrooms and engage in center based play activities ● Pre-K teachers participate in school-wide professional development to align curriculum Pre K families are invited once a month into Kindergarten classrooms during Family Friday events as an opportunity to meet teachers and current Kindergarten parents. Pre K orientation will be offered both in June and August for incoming families to tour the building, learn about expectations, and meet & greet teachers and administration 1:1 adult support will be provided for the first few weeks of school for individual students who present with emotional or physical needs during the transition. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 3  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher teams meet on a weekly basis to discuss pre and post assessment requirements across grade for each content area. Running Records and On Demand writing pieces have been chosen for literacy to align to our Curriculum (TCRWP). Staff developers come for 10 sessions per year and participate in assessment norming across grade teams.The Intervention team meets on a Bimonthly basis to design and turn key Tier 1 and Tier 2 assessments that can be used to for students at risk. Administration participation is expected at all meetings to support teachers decisions with choosing formal and informal assessment to ensure vertical alignment. A professional learning committee (PLC) will be developed to represent a member of each grade to support decisions around professional development needs of the schoolwide staff. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5E, 5B, 5D 5A, 5B, 5C 5A, 5C X 5E, 5C Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 338,881 43,028 12,366 0 2,993,600 X X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 4  identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 20 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 20 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 6  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 7  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 20, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 8  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 9  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act. Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 0  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 1  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: PS 20 AFTER-SCHOOL and SATURDAY PROGRAM PS 20 will serve approximately 68 ENL students in an after-school program that will run from November - May, 3 days per week each week. This after-school program will combine a 21st Century after-school grant (which will include permitting, dinner, and operations) and Title III funds (to be used for our Title III direct instruction, professional development field trips) to form this 3 day a week program. The Title III program and the 21st century program will be intertwined. The Title III component of this large program will occur on Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays. On Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays, 2 certified ESL teachers and 1 content teacher will work with one group of 10-15 students. Each instructional group will meet with the teacher for 60/50 minutes. Our 3 groups will consist of students in Kindergarten and 1st grade, 2nd -3rd grade, and 4th - 5th grade students. The two sessions will be from 2:40-3:40 and 3:40-4:30. There will be 3 teachers, 2 hours each day totalling 6 hours a week. The program will run for 21 weeks. There will be a total of 63 sessions for this program. We will invite all our sub groups including (newcomers, developing, LTEs, and SWDELLS). The instructional program will consist of promoting English language development that particularly supports student achievement in the content areas of literacy, social studies, and science. Students will learn content-specific vocabulary and phrases (their targeted goals), gaining valuable practice in expressing this language through oral and written activities. Small study groups will be created for each of these areas to support speaking, listening, reading and writing modalities. They will also learn instruction-specific vocabulary that students must master in order to function in classroom lessons (these words and phrases may be particular to our Literacy program and content areas) or they may have a much more general purpose. Neighborhood walks will be used to support oral development and writing by focusing on people, physical setting, environment, 5 senses, and theater arts. Over the four seasons students will create a story of "A day in the life of the city" for each season. Students will work in groups and partnerships to share information with each other and families. In addition, there will be 3 Saturday field trips (3 hours each) to support the 4 modalities. Our families will be included in these field trips to support instruction. Families will be encouraged to participate with the teachers in sharing personal stories or traditions with students. Interactions with parents will provide students with the opportunity to improve their listening and speaking skills, as they will be exposed to a variety of vocabulary surrounding culture, traditions, and changes in New York City over a period of time. One field trip will include a trip to the Henry Street Settlement for an opportunity for ENLs to view and reflect on a theater performance. The other 2 field trips will focus on Social Studies/Science content following the Scope and Sequence of the grades included in the group. Students will be able to use these field trips and interactions with parents as opportunities to improve their understanding of cultural traditions. In addition, they can incorporate aspects of life in New York City through the use of theater, interviews with parents, neighborhood walks, and visits to historical sites in New York City, such as Henry Street Settlement. The vocabulary and sentences chosen for study will be aligned with the language goals for students. Demonstration of acquisition and understanding of the newly 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information learned words, sentence structures, and concepts will be through reading and verbal expression during small group interactions, role play and project presentations. Through the integration of these opportunities, literacy and Social Studies/Science content, students will improve in their reading, writing, listening, and speaking modalities through these experiences. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: For the 2018-2019 school year, all of the Dual language and ESL teachers have been engaged in professional development through Vertical team, Inquiry and Race and Equity meetings. Professional development meetings will occur on each Monday of every month from September until June, which is documented in the schoolwide year long PD Plan .A dual language coordinator is present to facilitate the meetings on instructional focus for ELLs, analyzing student work through inquiry, creating small groups of ELLs based on the analysis of student work, and a focus on incorporating cultural traditions and celebrations into the curriculum With our dual language coordinator and ENL teacher, we have been creating curriculum maps that will align TCRWP units both in Reading and Writing and that will be integrated into the subjects for each grade in Social Studies Passport Units of Study and Science as per the NYC Scope and sequence guides. The primary focus of these meetings will be on the instructional focus in the classroom for ELL's and effective ways that ENL teachers can support these students through direct and rigorous instruction. Teachers will use Monday professional development time to plan instructional practice across grades, plan cultural celebrations within the school, and develop ways to work with targeted groups of ELLs in the classroom in order to best support their language development. In addition, we have launched EngageNY Math curriculum with an ENL specialist to support the needs of our ENL students. Additionally, we have weekly meetings devoted to the Dual language, TBE, and ENL Programs. At the beginning of the year, we discuss the NYSESLAT scores and the NYSITELL scores for the incoming Kindergarten students and newcomers into NYC schools. From this data, we determine the mandated minutes and how to provide services to students. We also use these meetings to create unit plans according to the needs of our students. The teachers will spend approximately 5 weeks reviewing key concepts in the native language. The ENL staff for our Title 3 program, along with our regular school day ENL staff, will be engaged in work on the instructional strategy of sheltered instruction during these professional development meetings. Specifically, they’ll focus on delivering clear instruction and on supporting vocabulary acquisition. 5  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our school offers many parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs..We will sponsor multiple opportunities for our families to attend events at the school targeted to support different needs. A "Meet the principal/assistant principal" event for our ELL families will occur in November for up to 2 hours in the Auditorium in the morning. The parent coordinator and ENL teachers will attend and translation and interpretation services for parents will be offered. A parent evening event in December will promote the connection between our literacy enrichment programs and language acquisition. We will include our ENL teachers, dual Language teachers, and science teachers, to conduct this parent night. The teachers will have parents experience the workshop model in language class as well as develop a content base project for families to experience the process of language acquisition through the use of Science and Social Studies in order to enrich academic vocabulary. Parents will be notified using a flyer sent home, use of our website, and through phone call, all translated. We anticipate serving over 200 people from 150 families. Parents will be invited to participate in Saturday field trips in order to impact the higher achievement of ELLs. Through the interaction between parents and students on field trips, students will be exposed to a variety of vocabulary and cultural information, which will help improve the language acquisition of ELLs. Family language classes will also be provided for parents in English, Spanish, and Mandarin. These classes are aimed to support parents in their own language development, so that they can better support their children at home. Parents can select a language that they would like to focus on learning and receive direct instruction and participate in engaging activities to help them learn vocabulary and improve their conversational language The parent coordinator will be tasked with collecting sign in sheets and agendas for the individual events to be filed in the main office. An agenda for each event will be translated. Below are events already scheduled for the year: First Friday of each Month (Sept.-June): Families engage in hands on instruction in their child's classroom Family Language Classes (Spanish, Mandarin, English): 11/9/18, 11/16/18, 12/7/18, 12/14/18, 1/4/19, 1/11/19, 1/18/19, 2/8/19, 2/1/19, 3/1/19, 3/8/19, 3/15/19, 3/22/19, 4/12/19, 4/5/19, 5/10/19, 5/17/19, 5/24/1 6 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 01 School Name Anna Silver School Borough Manhattan School Number 020 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Sarah Pinto Coach Assistant Principal Carrie Orr Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Inna Djaniants School Counselor Lauren Zermani Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Cely Traje Superintendent Carry Chan Parent Parent Coordinator Tina Mo Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 491 8 Total number of ELLs 68 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.85%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Mandarin, Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE TBE TBE DL Lang. Spanish DL Chinese School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) (2015-2016) (2009-2010) 2 2 DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 2 1 K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 3 6 0 9 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS 20 uses the following assessments: Teachers College Reading and Writing running records, performances assessments, State ELA and Math, end of the unit math, NYSESLAT and NYSITELL. Estrellitas (Spanish), Meizhou (Chinese), Fundations (English), Words Their Way, Palabras a su Paso (Spanish) are programs with assessments used for word study. All assessments are used to inform instruction. About an equal number of ELLs are scoring at the beginning, intermediate and advance level. Running records show that students are able to decode, but comprehension is an area that students struggle. In addition, writing is the modality which students show the smallest progress. Instruction targets developing academic oral language to develop reading and writing across genres. 9  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers are using Fundations on the English side for all K-2nd grade classrooms and Estrellitas and Meizhou on the home language side to support decoding, encoding, and vocabulary development. Small group and 1:1 conferencing is used on a daily basis during lessons. Grade wide and vertical instructional alignment is used to ensure cohesion of CCLS and language development. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the ENL and Dual Language program are measured by the progress of students performance in the classrooms. Their TCRWP reading levels, conference notes, and teacher observations indicate the progress of students. Progress on the NYSESLAT is also used as an indicator for program success. The Dual Language teams have begun designing fluency benchmarks for native and target language from grades PreK -5. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Students can receive additional RTI from intervention teachers and Free Standing ENL teachers who support additional intervention needed. During inquiry team and grade team meetings, teachers analyse data to determine allocation and scheduling of resources. Additionally, as evidenced by classroom observations and advance data, students need additional time for discussion and questioning. Classroom teachers in the dual language programs have a 50 minute block each day to support additional ENL needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Response to Intervention is determined through a specific protocol which requires teachers to show evidence of Tier 1 supports, implementing small group work and conferencing, and analysing data. If evidence concludes that additional supports are needed, a recommendation is made to our Academic Intervention Team which is comprised of ENL teachers, Special Education Teachers, Mental Health therapists, administration, and teachers. Targeted recommendations are made to support students and teacher development which best meets the students needs. Small group instruction will be utilized to support the development of academic progression. ELLs are grouped by language proficiency and skills. Instruction will focus on vocabulary and developing language utilizing sentence and question stems. Language and vocabulary development will be taught through content integration. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data reveals that ENLs across the grades lag behind in three modalities, specifically reading, writing and listening. Trends show that ENLs at the Entering and Emerging (beginning and intermediate) levels advance to the next level more rapidly than students who score at the intermediate level moving to the advance level. Students who fall at the intermediate level show that their need is in developing the academic language that is required to read and write as well as engage in conversations. Similar numbers of ENLs are represented throughout the different proficiency levels; however, students at the advance and intermediate levels stall for a few years. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our ENL team meets bimonthly to review data and make revisions to instruction and individual plans. Our RTI team meets on a weekly basis to support students at risk who are not responding to the current interventions. Part IV: ELL Programming 0  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ELLs who are in the ENL program are grouped by grade (no more than two contiguous grades) and by proficiency levels for integrated instruction during the literacy block. Classes with large numbers of ENLs are provided with integrated services. Students who fall under the Entering and Emerging receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction with stand alone and integrated services. Students in the Transitioning and Expanding receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction. Students in the Transitioning stage receive integrated services and stand alone services. Whereas students in the Expanding stage receives integrated services. Students who are in the Commanding stage receive 90 minutes of integrated services for two years. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. ENLs in the Chinese/Spanish Dual language program are grouped by grade in a side by side model where one teacher teaches in the target language and the other in the native language of ENLs. All content areas are taught in English and in Chinese/Spanish. All subjects are taught in both languages. For Dual Language self contained model classrooms, the teacher will teach one day in the target language and the following day in the English language. The targeted ratio of ELLs to English proficient students is 50% however our classrooms have a higher ration of English proficient students at this time. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? At the beginning of the year, teachers are given the NYSESLAT results and provided with an information session on how to use the data. The students in the ENL program are provided with the mandated ENL minutes based on the NYSESLAT proficiency levels either in integrated and/or stand alone services depending on their NYSESLAT level. The ENL teacher collaborates with the classroom teachers to coordinate intergrated services during the content areas. Students receive home language support with literature and glossaries in the home language. Students have the option of producing work in their home language. The ENL teacher works with teachers to balance mandated minutes with integrated and stand alone services. ENL is provided in Dual Language classrooms each day by the classroom teachers who are certified in ESL or TESOL license. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the ENL program, content is integrated with the delivery of instruction in English. Content is used as a vehicle to teach students the English language to read, write, listen and speak. Through this model, students will be taught academic language. The science and social studies scope and sequence and the Common Core Learning Standards are used when teachers engage in curriculum planning. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In the Dual language program, ENLs are assessed throughout the year in their native language with rubrics/checklists created by the teachers. Teacher conferences and student work are also used to gauge student growth. Students in grades three and above take the Chinese Reading test. 1  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students are assessed for their areas of strength and areas of growth. They are instructed in small groups engaging in language development through the content areas. b. Newcomers are assessed for their areas of strength and areas of growth. They receive small group instruction to develop their language skills through by integrating content. Students also receive phonemic instruction, vocabulary development and language to develop the receptive and productive skills. c. The students who fall under the Developing category shows that the need is in academic language. Students will be grouped to target academic language development in all four modalities. Lessons will include language objectives. d. We currently do not have long term ENLs, but in the event that we will, students will engage in small group work to target language and/or content. All assessments will be used to inform instruction for this group of students. e. Former ENLs will receive 90 minutes of push-in services in the content areas. The ENL teachers and classroom teachers will plan and co-teach to target the needs of former ENLs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ENLs with disabilities are grouped heterogeneously. All teachers who teach ENLs with disabilities meet regularly to discuss instructional strategies to best meet the needs of the student. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? During the hiring process, ENL extentions are a consideration in hiring to support students in a LRE by limiting their transistions. Flexible programing is used to ensure integrated services are given as often as possible. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Within the dual language Spanish program, bridge classrooms were created to ensure a closer balance to English verse non English speaking students. Dual Language Spanish was also expanded to Pre K. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not discontinuing any programs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are afforded equal opportunities. They participate in school trips, events such as Lunar New Year and Spanish Heritage celebrations. Students receive instruction around different dance styles throughout their time at PS 20. Students will learn Latin dance, African dance, Traditional Indian dance, and modern dance. A ENL Saturday Academy is offered both in the fall and spring for 10-12 week cycles and includes in house instructions around the theme New York sights and sounds. Students will also attend field trips to New York harbor, Tenement Museum, and Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island depending on availability. 2  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All curriculum is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and the Science and Social Studies Scope and Sequence to ensure that all students are receiving grade appropriate instruction. Teachers have begun revising curriculum towards the Next Generation Learning Standards. Students' reading materials are match to their reading levels. Resources in the students' home language are provided, if available. Technology is incorporated in the lessons to support student learning, such as Raz Kids reading program, learning.com, the use of Smartboard technology for classroom lessons, music and videos integrated for visual support. In addition, students receive a technology specialty class once a week to improve their ability to navigate the Internet and learn coding. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home Language is assessed using the Home Language Survey when registering. In addition, teachers use ancedotal observations and NYSITELL is used with students to adjust the needs of the student. In Dual Language, students receive 1 full day of their home language and 1 full day of the English. ENL services are integrated into the Flow of the Day to ensure students are receiving at risk services in addition to integrated and stand alone ENL services. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All curriculum used is research based to support students developmental needs. Teachers plans reflect alignment with CCLS and a shift to 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled students are welcomed by the office staff and ENL teacher. They are given a school tour prior to meeting their teacher. Students receive a classroom buddy, if available someone who speaks their language, to support their needs in the beginning of their enrollment. Students receive translated homework books in their home language. Students are given digital and written glossaries and dictionaries to support their work in and out of class. Students will receive a period of social language instruction and every day conversational language to support their English proficiency. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are no language electives offered during the school day. Mandarin enrichment is offered to non dual language families and students during afterschool programming. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. The dual language program is a side-by-side model and self contained model. In the side by side model there are two classes per grade with two teacher--one teacher teaches in English and another teaches in Mandarin/Spanish. The following day, the teachers swap classed. The ELLs and EPs learn their content in their target language in one day. In a self contained model, one teacher will teach English one day and Spanish the next day. The ELLs and EPs learn their content language over the course of two days. 3  b.All content areas: math, social studies, ELA are taught in both languages. Science is provided by the Science teacher in English. c. English is taught by one teacher and Mandarin is taught by another teacher on separate days in the Mandarin Dual Language program while the Spanish Dual language program, one teacher teaches both English and Spanish during the day. For example, she teaches Spanish in the morning and English in the afternoon and the following day, English in the morning and Spanish in the afternoon. d. Both languages in the Spanish Dual language and the Mandarin Dual language programs are taught at the same time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ALL pedagogues are afforded opportunities to attend workshops that support the learning of ENLs. These workshops either take place in school provided by the ENL teachers or administrators who are either certified in bilingual education and TESOL, or outside organizations such as TC , Manhattan Field Office, and intervisitation at other DL schools. Dual Language and ENL teachers have priority when attending workshops. Teachers also attend workshops provided by the Division of English Language Learners office. Most recently, the dual language Mandarin team conducted an intervisitation to PS 184 to focus on classroom environment and curriculum development. Our Dual Language coordinator supports teachers throughout the year by facilitating vertical planning meetings twice a week and after school professional development opportunities on supporting ELL students. Most PD focuses on intervention programs, small group and conference practices, and creating a supporting physical environment through the use of visuals and scaffolds. Teaching assistants, office staff, teachers, and school aides are offered professional development to support understanding of how to best meet the needs of families and students with ENL services. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Teachers have the opportunity to attend professional development sessions related to ENL in outside institutions. Teacher's College calendar days that pertain specifically to supporting ENL students are prioritized for ENL and dual language teachers. In house professional development is created during our cycles of learning giving teachers opportunities to collaborate around ENL topics. Professional development attendance is kept at the school. Teachers are responsible for maintaining their own records. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Families are invited into school during the summer and the first days of school to meet one on one with the ENL teacher. The teacher discusses different options available from the NYCDOE with each family. If the family is unavailable to meet at school, 4  the parent coordinator or ENL teacher will attempt to meet families off school property. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Once a month, the principal hosts a Question and Answer session with families. Families are invited to attend to discuss information about curriculum, activities and events are shared and discussed. Families can also attend parent classes which offer learning Mandarin or Spanish as a second language during 8-12 week cycles. Families also attend informational sessions with the ENL teacher individually to discuss different ENL opportunities available in the DOE. Families are invited to back to school night, curriculum night where they learn about the curricula, goals and expectations of learning for each grade. Interpretations are provided by school staff and parent volunteers. Teachers provide monthly newsletters to parents written in English, Chinese and Spanish. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. n/a 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Sarah Pinto, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Anna Silver School DBN: 01m020 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Sarah Pinto Carrie Orr Tina Mo Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Inna Djaniants ENL/Bilingual Teacher Cely Traje Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Lauren Zermani School Counselor Carry Chan Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/18/18 09/18/18 09/18/18 09/18/18 09/18/18 09/18/18 09/18/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 01m020 School Name: Anna Silver School Superintendent: Carry Chan The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yue Teng Mo LAC Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use parent surveys, anecdotal feedback, and parent participation data such as attendance at conferences and back to school night. During registration, parents are asked to complete a preferred language of communication on the HLIS. We use HLIS, ATS reports, and student Emergency Contact cards to ensure that we know the language preference for the parents. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 8  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Chinese Spanish Bengali Nahuatl Vietnamese Russian Japanese 401 116 53 6 1 1 1 1 69.14 20 9.14 1.03 .17 .17 .17 .17 398 106 55 5 1 1 1 1 68.62 18.28 9.48 .86 .17 .17 .17 .17 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish, Chinese, English Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Orientation documents and welcome letter Yearly Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Teachers are paid per session to support translation of written and oral needs throughout the year. Funds are scheduled in Galaxy to support translation of large documents needed school wide. Parents volunteer time to support translation services during PTA and family events. 9  Classroom & Schoolwide newsletters Weekly, Monthly Monthly Calendar Monthly Registration Forms, Administration forms, Discipline code & Handbook Daily Teachers are paid per session to support translation of written and oral needs throughout the year. Funds are scheduled in Galaxy to support translation of large documents needed school wide. Parents volunteer time to support translation services during PTA and family events. Teachers are paid per session to support translation of written and oral needs throughout the year. Funds are scheduled in Galaxy to support translation of large documents needed school wide. Parents volunteer time to support translation services during PTA and family events. Teachers are paid per session to support translation of written and oral needs throughout the year. Funds are scheduled in Galaxy to support translation or purchasing of documents needed school wide. Parents volunteer time to support translation services during PTA and family events. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 0  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum nights (September) Bi Yearly Parent teacher conferences (November and March) Bi-Yearly Family Engagement Tuesdays Weekly Family orientations and Monthly Family Tours for incoming families Monthly interpretation service(s)? Teachers are paid per session to support translation of written and oral needs throughout the year. Parents volunteer time to support translation services during PTA and family events. The NYCDOE Translation unit is used for over the phone conversations needed on a daily basis. Teachers are paid per session to support translation of written and oral needs throughout the year. Parents volunteer time to support translation services during PTA and family events. The NYCDOE Translation unit is used for over the phone conversations needed on a daily basis. Teachers are paid per session to support translation of written and oral needs throughout the year. Parents volunteer time to support translation services during PTA and family events. The NYCDOE Translation unit is used for over the phone conversations needed on a daily basis. Teachers are paid per session to support translation of written and oral needs throughout the year. 1  Parents volunteer time to support translation services during PTA and family events. The NYCDOE Translation unit is used for over the phone conversations needed on a daily basis. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Email blasts in multiple languages are sent out, as well as the use of social media sites such as WeChat, Twitter, and Facebook. During the hiring process, language is a consideration and therefore staff members in the building speak all of the main languages needed (Spanish, Chinese (Cantonese, Mandarin, Fuzhounese), Bengali, and Russian). Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff are provided with a Monday PD educating them around the Chancellor's Regulations, which include A-663. In addition, staff members are given reminders during active times of the year such as Parent Teacher Conferences, First Day of School, and PTA Meetings of the requirement for access to translation and interpretation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents are provided with the Bill of Rights and Parents' Guide to Language Access in the parents' prefer language, when available. Welcome Posters and Language ID Guide will be available at the school in the parents' prefer language, when available. During registration, parents receive notification from a pedagogue in their home language their rights. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 2  Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PS 20 has an open door policy where families are welcome to come into the school to speak with the parent coordinator and/or administrators to express their needs. We use the a school created survey early in the school year as well as the DOE Parent survey. We use parent surveys, anecdotal feedback, and parent participation data such as attendance at conferences and back to school night. 3 
