2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 04M038 School Name: P.S. 38 ROBERTO CLEMENTE Principal: CARLINA SANTOS-BARTON 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Roberto Clemente Learning Center, PS 38 310400010038 PK-5 School Number (DBN): 04M038 232 E. 103 rd Street, New York, NY 10029 212-860-5882 212-860-6093 Phone Number: Fax: Carlina Santos-Barton csantos@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Carlina Santos-Barton Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Zachary Nilva Kenneth Shaw Maria McAndrew Maria Ramos N/A PartnershipwithChildren CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 4 Alexandra Estrella Superintendent: 160 E. 120 th Street, Room 401, New York, NY 10035 Superintendent’s Office Address: Aestrel3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-348-2873 Phone Number: 212-348-4107 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Manhattan Field Support Center FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Avenue, Manhattan, NY 10001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-356-7564 Phone Number: Fax: (212) 356-7564 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Vanessa Ramos Zachary Nilva Kenneth Shaw Elisabeth Rivera N/A N/A Gina Marie *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) NicolettJaouen Jillian Ramirez Teshaun Green ShamraWhyte Lauren DeGeorge Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our vision is to graduate scholars that aspire to achieve excellence in all that they do. Our scholars will think critically, have a passion for learning, and a desire to make a positive change in the community and the world around them. Our mission is to create a peaceful nurturing atmosphere where all stake holders are committed to working collaboratively and respectfully to ensure that academic excellence of all scholars. We will actively engage scholars in curriculum that provokes critical thinking. We will engage scholars in activities that foster a sense of community and awareness of the world around them. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 38 is an innovative school community who truly believes in the idea of lifelong learning, we are continuously elevating our approach to teaching and learning to ensure our school is always at the cutting edge. Teachers engage in professional learning groups every week that focus on supporting their professional growth and meeting the needs of our scholars. We utilize specific protocols that support our reflection on student work and teacher practice. This has led to the revision of curriculum and lessons to better support the needs of scholars without sacrificing the expectations and rigor of grade level standards. Teachers work collaboratively on lesson studies to highlight more effective teaching strategies focused on student engagement and strategic thinking. PS 38 has an affiliation with Hunter College. Not only to support the training of student teachers, but also via the Astor Grant. PS 38 teachers in Kindergarten through second grade receive on site instructional support and resources from Hunter College professors. Through this program teachers strengthen practices around guided reading instruction, improve student acquisition and use of academic vocabulary and use data to identify areas of focused support for individual and small groups of scholars that will better prepare early readers for the next phase of learning. At PS 38 we believe that all members of the school community work to support scholars academically, socially and emotionally. Several teachers and teacher assistants have received training in Reading Rescue and other intervention programs to support our struggling readers particularly in the lower grades. Other intervention approaches at PS 38 include Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Services (T.C.I.S.) effectively engage all scholars with social/emotional challenges in a positive and caring environment. 85% of all staff members (teachers, administrators, school aides, teacher assistants and service providers) are certified in T.C.I.S. To meet the social, health, linguistic and academic needs of these scholars and all of the students, we collaborate with different community based organizations and have developed partnerships with Mt Sinai’s Family Medical and Mental Health Clinic, which is housed in our school building. Union Settlement, another C.B.O., provides a variety of supports for our scholars and their families including an after school program for grade 2 and 3 scholars and a tutorial program for scholars grades K-3. We also participate in R.E.A.D. and the New York Therapy Animals to encourage scholars in grades 1-4 with sever social/emotional diagnosis with reading. We have also partnered with the Child Mind Institute to provide behavior interventions for our most struggling scholars. This 2018-19 school year we will be collaborating with Partnerships with Children. This partnership will strengthen our current supports and add supports for not only scholars, but their families and teachers. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  Each of these partnerships work to meet scholars at their emotional and academic level and build their ability to read and respond at or above grade level. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 9.5% of our scholars are English Language Learners and 36% percent of our students have an Individualized Education Plan and receive a range of services. 60.2% of scholars with an IEP are in ICT classrooms, 29% of scholars with an IEP ar in self contained classrooms (12:1:1 or 12:1), 2.4% of scholars with IEPs receive SETSS services only and 8.4% of scholars receive related services only. Of all scholars with an IEP, 50.6% receive counseling. While many scholars have demonstrated progress in understanding text during class discussions, formal and informal assessment data show that all scholars, particularly ENL's and SWD's, struggle to express their thinking in writing. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2017 -18 school year PS 38 demonstrated improvement in Rigorous Instruction as a result of our focus on assessment feedback and student engagement. This past year we employed the support of Achievement Network (ANET). They have provided a series of protocols that guide reflection and analysis when looking at student work and teacher practices and planning. Through these processes teachers continue to analyze data and understand scholars specific needs however, through the reflective protocols, we ensure that the rigor and expectation of standards is not lost or diminished. Teachers work collaboratively to consider specific instructional strategies that support individual and well as small groups of children in their classrooms. As per the Framework for Great School 2017 Report "Strong Family-Community Ties" and "Trust" are PS 38's continue to be our strongest elements under the Framework. A noted 1.55 point increase under Strong Family Ties from the 2016-17 data to 2017-18 report. As a small school community it is important that we support our families and work to understand how we can help them with the scholars we share. In the 2018-2019 school year we will continue to strengthen our work around mental health and healthy living. In addition, we will be strengthening our schoolwide community with the newly established collaboration with Partnership with Children. Through this work we hope to reinforce, schoolwide expectations and core values, foster positive social interactions among scholars and the community and fortify or build relationships with existing and new families. During the 2018-19 school year we will continue to work towards increasing student proficiency in literacy and math; teachers and leadership will continue to strengthen their pedagogy, resources and skills to better address the needs of scholars and ensure engagement of all scholars in their classrooms; schoolwide we will continue to enhance our collaborative practices with the support of ANET. Another focus this year will be the implementation of structures to strengthen how we identify and strategically support students in crisis so that all scholars may achieve success. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 04M038 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 213 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 11 9 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 19 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 89.2% % Reduced Lunch 14.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 61.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.1 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 14.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 75% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups - Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 65 61 88.5% 0.9% 30.0% 30.0% 5.6% 0.5% 0 4% 6.4 5.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed na na na X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths relative to Rigorous Instruction include teacher's implementing of the Common Core Shifts in mathematics and ELA. Teachers collaborative work this 2017-18 school year to incorporate instructional strategies that engage scholars in both literacy and math. However, looking at trends in subgroups in the 2016-2017 results, specifically Students with Disabilities, it is noted that there was an increase in the number of level 1 scholars, and a decrease in the number of level 2 scholars. Students, particularly our Students with Disabilities, still struggle to think critically about what they read and are challenged to effectively process and respond. Advance observation data indicates that overall, teachers struggle with component 3D, Using assessment in instruction and 3C, Engaging students in learning. Feedback to most teachers indicated the need to include "checks for understanding" in their lesson and unit plans as well as scaffolds that better support the various learners in the classroom . In addition, there is very little evidence that teachers implement practices that promote student reflection. In very few classrooms students are noted self assessing or providing peer comments to support their own learning. During the 2017-18 school year feedback to students from teachers came in various tiers to better support students as they maneuvered through the curriculum. Teachers planned assessments at the conclusion of literacy and math lessons in the form of exit tickets or tasks for the entire class. They also implemented weekly performance tasks to monitor 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  student mastery of major standards taught each week in literacy and math. In addition, we employed a consultancy that provided interim assessments and protocols to analyze assessments, student and teacher work products. These resources helped to strengthen our teacher team work, better understand the rigor and expectations of the standards and strategically plan to better support the various learners in our classroom. However, engagement remained the second lowest rated indicator on Advance ratings, evidence that teachers need to include opportunities for scholars to better understand expectations, reflect on their learning and be partners in the plans to support their own learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be a 20 percentage point increase in the number of scholars performing at (level 3) or above (level 4) grade level expectations as per the Spring 2018 N.Y.S. E.L.A. (to 35%) and Math Assessment (to 25%). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All classrooms will employ the use of Independent Reading Leveled Assessment (IRLA) to determine specific reading concerns for all scholars K-5, including ENL's and SWD's. All Scholars K-5 September 2018- June 2019 Administrative staff, Grade Team Leaders They will also utilize intervention tools and resources recommended by the IRLA guides to ensure that scholars achieve reading goals. 2 Teacher Leaders will be hired to support this work in literacy specifically the work in PLCs with the guidance of Achievement Network (ANET) Continue to employ the use of Achievement Network to support the analysis of data, develop a deeper understanding of the CCLS in literacy and math that will enhance teacher planning and identifying of support structures for all scholars with a specific focus on ENL's and SWD's Professional Development Cycles will include cycles of common planning and looking at student work through the utilization of protocols at least two (2) grade level common planning sessions a month will focus on literacy and the other two will be focused in math. During the Mondays PD teachers will engage in PD that will further support to strengthen teacher instructional practices for all students. At least 8 Mondays will focus on the analysis of results provided via the interim assessments in literacy and math throughout the year. na 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Classroom Teachers All Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administrative staff and grade team leaders All Teachers October 2018- June 2019 ANET, Classroom teachers, Grade Leaders, Teacher Leaders, administration na na na How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Grade teams will meet with parents 4 times during the school year to discuss instructional expectations and support structures for reading and math instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  In September the Principal will share support and instructional tools like IRLA (Independent Reading Level Assessment) and the new Math program, Investigations with families and outline supports that can be utilized at home to ensure scholar success. The School Support Team in collaboration with the Parent Coordinator will provide monthly workshops to inform families of RTI, school based support services and the special education process. Additionally, a series of workshops will be offered with focus on supporting student learning by providing families, writing at home workshops to reinforce the skills and strategies students are learning in the classroom. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : Teacher leaders, 4 teachers (3 days a week, 2 hours a day After school ) Instructional Resources : Achievement Network, materials and workshops associated with IRLA and PD, Investigations Math Schedule Adjustments: Add 3 whole days via Calendar Changes Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019 90% of scholars including E.N.L.'s and SWD's will demonstrate understanding of text by achieving a level 3 on the 4 point reading rubric on weekly performance tasks.  By February 2019 there will be a 20% increase in the number of scholars, specifically SWD's, in Level 3 and 4 and a decrease in the number of scholars in levels 1 and 2 as per the Mid-year performance assessment.  By February 2019 all scholars including E.N.L.'s and S. W. D.'s will show at least a .50 increase in reading as per their IRLA data and a minimum of .60 at the end of March. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. IRLA Reading Rubrics ANET Assessments for ELA and MATH Periodic Assessments Benchmark Assessment (Engage NY) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. na na X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? During the 2017-2018 school year there were a documented 67 incidents, an increase in the number of incidents reported in 2016-17 school year. Of the 67 reported incidents, 37 were categorized level 4 and 5, the most egregious of infractions. Students committing these infractions were aggressive and demonstrated some of the most severe social and emotional needs. This area was selected as the greatest need because the school struggles to support scholars who have the potential to be in crisis due to trauma, academic frustration, or an emotional or learning disability. The number of scholars in crisis or with the potential for being in crisis exceeds the resources available at PS 38. 32% of all PS 38 scholars live in a type of temporary housing situation (doubled up, shelter or other temporary living situation). Of those scholars 10% (known to us) experienced or witnessed domestic violence in the home. 24% of those scholars have an IEP. STH (Students in Temporary Housing) scholars make up 20% of our IEP population. Differently abled scholars make up 36% of our entire population, higher than the City average. The number of scholars coming to our school in crisis exceeds the available resource to support them through academic and social emotional challenges. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  As a small school, we have insufficient human resources to support students who come to us in crisis. In addition, we have not identified or designed a plan to best support scholars before they are in crisis as an intervention. The Student Intervention Team can use data collected from the Online Occurrence Reporting System to identify scholars in need of social emotional support. However, biweekly meetings with the student intervention team are usually used to ensure that interventions and services outlined in the IEP meet the needs of scholars in severe emotional and academic distress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 PS 38's SIT and PBIS Team will implement structures to identify scholars in crisis or have experienced a form of trauma that impedes learning and strategically support these scholars such that they can experience success as evidenced by a 20% decrease in the number of incidents as outlined by the Online Occurrence Reporting System and a 5% increase in attendance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 2nd Tuesday of every month September 2018 - June 2019 All Teachers, Support Staff (School aides office staff), Service providers (social workers) S.L.T. Teacher Members, Administrators CBO's Partnerships with Children, Mt Sinai Medical and Mental Health Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). There will be monthly assemblies orchestrated by grade level teams that emphasis the schoolwide values and team building among scholars. All scholars. All staff As part of our school wide P.B.I.S. initiative (in our 4th year), Incentives such as certificates, recognition and prizes (movie tickets, "Scholar Dollars," etc.) will be distributed to scholars that consistently demonstrate our school wide values and expectations. Implementation and it's effectiveness will be supported and monitored by the P.B.I.S. team which includes Social Workers, Assistant Principal and classroom teachers. This team will meet twice a month to ensure the that teachers have included a viable management system in the classroom that is aligned to structures implemented in the cafeteria, hallway and other areas throughout the school. This team will also facilitate monthly assemblies for the entire school community, PD for classroom teachers and informational for parents. A sub-team that is focused on social emotional support particularly for scholars in crisis or have experienced trauma, will be developed. These team will implement preventive structures and protocols to identify scholars who need support in advance of full blown crisis. They will serve to provide resources to scholars and their families so that social emotional needs that may impede on scholars academic success are surfaced and met. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  In some cases additional supports will be provided to individual scholars via the recommendations of the SIT Committee specifically scholars demonstrating high need (i.e. scholars involved in repeated incidents, demonstrate need for crisis intervention, etc.) where all other efforts may not be sufficient. As part of our schoolwide initiative to improve student behavior and foster positive interactions among all member of the school community, the first unit of study school wide will be a "Building Community Unit." Teachers with scholars will develop norms and establish specific school wide structures and routines. Children will gain understanding of our schoolwide values and how they transcend the school day and the community at large. Students grade 2-5 Teachers To strengthen these values beyond the school, there will be a bi-weekly breakfast with families to discuss schoolwide values, expectations for scholars and other support structures to strengthen a positive school community Parents Students September-October 2018 P.B.I.S. committee Administration Every other Tuesday September 2018-June 2019 S.L.T. P.B.I.S., SEL Team, SIT Parent Coordinator The PBIS Team will meet twice a month to discuss "glows and grows" of the plan and plan additional support structures that will ream success in student behavior and interactions. Scholars PK - 5 October 2018 PBIS Team, Assistant Principal February 2019 May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers and administrative staff will invite families to the monthly assemblies to gain an understanding of our Core Values. They will be asked to participate in organizing events by creating posters, being guest speakers, making donations, participate in fund raising activities as well as recognizing, identifying and rewarding the monthly tenets when they see students exhibiting them at home. Parent volunteers will also participate in community beautification events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : Social Worker, Assistant Principal, Dean Instructional Resources :Children's Books for each Building Community Unit per grade K-5, Students' incentives (stickers, book marks, shirts etc.) Schedule Adjustments: Monthly assemblies by grade and schoolwide, quarterly pep rallies 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 there will be a 50% decrease in the number of incidences as per OORS data (to 33) and a 5% increase in attendance (to 92%). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS data and incident reports reviewed during monthly safety meetings and compared to the data 1 year ago to monitor progress towards meeting the goal of reduction. PBIS, SEL, Attendance and SIT Team notes, school surveys and OORs data analysis throughout the year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed na na na X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2016-2017 Quality Review highlighted 4.2 as an area of celebration stating, "Systematic analysis of student data and work products has resulted in mastery of goals for groups of students. Teachers have played an integral role in focusing on the instructional goals as well as the design and delivery of schoolwide coherence across the building to support students learning across schools." As a school, teacher teams engage in a protocol when looking at student work and reflect on teacher planning during allocated common planning times. These protocols require teachers to engage in cycles of inquiry. Teams are not engaging in all aspects of this cycle, which greatly impacts student achievement levels across classrooms. The protocol requires teachers to examine student work products and identify the strengths, gaps and needs of a student. However, many teacher teams fail to complete the protocol and engage in the reflection of student misconceptions, consider how they will re-teach and reassess. As a result teachers do not engage in those crucial pieces of the process to develop student understanding of content and master the expectation of the standards. In addition to the inquiry cycle, the protocol that teams were using, did not allow teachers to analyze student work and use it as a window into student thinking. Implementing this protocol to fidelity and completely supports teachers in surfacing student’s misconceptions that need to be addressed and thus lead to higher levels of student achievement. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  In addition the school’s vision is to develop critical thinkers who will closely read text. The school's instructional cabinet and leader have not outlined a close reading protocol or structure for teachers to implement in their classroom so that all scholars may engage in this process. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of staff will utilize inquiry based protocols during teacher team meetings to look at student work, analyze student data, identify strategies and develop plans that support scholars which will result in a 20 percentage point increase in the number of scholars achieving level 3 or 4 in the overall grade on the Teacher's College Writer's Continuum. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration and or consultants from Achievement Network will meet regularly with the grade team leaders to build their capacity in facilitation (use of protocols, data analysis, book study discussion questions, etc.). Grade team leaders Weekly September 2018 – June 2019 Administrative staff, Professional Development team Team Leaders and administrative support structures (Assistant Principal, Dean, Teacher Leaders and Principal) will provide support with the implementation of the identified protocols for discussion and analysis weekly in the beginning of the year then monthly, then as needed. Members of the administrative cabinet will be assigned to groups of teachers in the lower grades, K-2, where most of the staff is new to our school and teaching. Notes and agendas from each team meeting will track their work and provide opportunity for consistent feedback on their work and processes. Bi monthly walk-through with grade leaders will also support to norm our school understanding of best practices. Individual support will be determined by observations and discussions in grade teams. Support plans may be developed with the teacher or outlined by the administrative cabinet for individuals and groups of teachers. Content Leaders for literacy and math will be identified to facilitate, inquiry teams or book studies that support the analysis of student work and the improvement of teacher practice. Members of the PD team (grade team leaders) will facilitate grade-level data analysis and small group, professional learning sessions every six -eight weeks (Danielson Component Study, book study, or topics such as multiple entry points, rigorous instruction, etc.) looking at trends and patterns around student progress and mastery of standards. This information will be used side by side with action plans to ensure that all scholars, particularly students with disabilities and English language learners are supported using strategies, skills and tools that will advance their learning. All teachers Monthly Nov. 2018 – Jan. 2019 March 2019 June 2019 Administrative Staff, Grade Team Leaders, Professional Development Team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Surveys will be completed by teachers to determine engagement during weekly PD sessions. Observations by administration will determine the effectiveness of professional development. Student work products and student data will be collected every 6-8 weeks to review the alignment of tasks to the Common Core Learning Standards. All Teacher November Administration, Grade leads and Content Leads Parent Coordinator, administration 2018 February 2019 April 2019 October 2018 - May 2019 Each grade will conduct at least 2 parent workshops during the school year to inform families of learning standards and instructional strategies that support scholars which may be reinforced at home. Parents Teachers Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Each grade will conduct at least 2 parent workshops during the school year to inform families of learning standards and instructional strategies that support scholars which may be reinforced at home. This is in addition to family Fridays (twice a month). The first session is to describe the academic program for the 2018-2019 school year and introduce academic expectations. The second session will be share how parents can support scholars at home in one of the identified "trouble" areas in mathematics or literacy, i.e. fractions or reading informational text. Teachers will engage families in activities that they can do at home to reinforce literacy and math skills. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : Teacher leaders, at least 5-6 days of Per Diem Subs for PD days 5 PD Days for IRLA, Math Consultancy Instructional Resources : Achievement Network (Consulting services)materials and workshops associated with IRLA Schedule Adjustments: Add 6 PD half days via Calendar Change Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  By February 2019 there will be:  A 15% increase in the number of teachers being rated effective and or highly effective in Domain 3 components.  A 20% increase in the number of students reading at grade level school wide as per IRLA  By February there will be a 10% increase in the number of scholars, specifically SWD's and ENL's, in Level 3 and 4 and a decrease in the number of scholars in levels 1 and 2 as per the Mid-year performance assessment task. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher Observation Student Data - IRLA, ANET Interim Assessments, Writing assessments NYC Benchmark Assessment Student work products and writing data summary sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed NA NA NA X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Some of our strengths are as follows:  The 2018 School Quality Guide indicates a .85 point increase in Effective Leadership from 3.57 to 3.91.  As per the 2018 NYC School Survey 100% of teachers feel that the principal sets high standards for student learning and most feel that expectations for meeting instructional goals is clear  82% of teachers feel strongly that the principal tracks student academic progress  (88%) strongly agree that there are clear expectations for implementing what is learned in professional development. The priority needs are as follows:  The 2017-18 School Quality Guide indicates a need to improve in Program Coherence under the element of School Leadership. Therefore there is a need to identify tools and consistent structures to track and monitor initiatives implemented in the school and use the insight to make informed decisions that will move the school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  forward more consistently throughout the school year. This structure will help to identify resources that may better support scholars.. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 PS 38's instructional cabinet will have engaged in at least 2 meetings to reflect on the effectiveness of schoolwide initiatives and structures as evidenced by meeting notes and documented structural changes. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The instructional cabinet will identify the tools and structures to evaluate schoolwide initiatives at least 2 times during the 2018-2019 school year. All teachers December 2018 and April 2019 Administration, Grade leaders, All teachers All Teachers October Administration and Grade Leaders 2018- January 2019 April 2019 Administrators and the instructional cabinet will visit each teacher’s classroom as a grade level cohort at least 3 times over the course of the year, and provide teachers with formative written or verbal feedback aligned to the schoolwide goals and initiatives in order to improve student achievement outcomes for all students. The team will analyze patterns and trends to assess the effectiveness of instructional feedback and other initiatives regarding classroom instruction School leaders and grade teams will reflect on the teach and learn cycle 3 times during the year to determine the effects of our re-teach and re-engagement activities on student outcomes. Administration and Grade Leaders All Teachers November 2018 February 2019 April 2019 The instructional Cabinet will reflect on schoolwide data at least 2 times through out the year to to ensure alignment to all instructional programs and initiatives All teachers November 2018 and March 2019 Administration and Grade Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PC and school leaders will engage in community walk-through to familiarize parents with our pedagogical practices and discuss supports for scholars. Family Fridays 1x a month per grade will engage families in academic tasks with scholars. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : Teacher leaders, Per Diem Subs for PD days, AP Instructional Resources : CCLS, Investigations math, IRLA , TC Writing Schedule Adjustments: Coverage for instructional walks and debriefs Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By October 2018 the instructional cabinet will identify tolls to evaluate schoolwide practices and initiatives. By February 2019 the instructional team would have engaged in at least 1 reflective process and 2 reflections on the re-teach and re-engagement practices. February 2019 reflective meeting with PC to access the effectiveness of Family Fridays Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Reflective documents on the process by each member of the team, sign ins and meeting notes, student data and work products Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. na na na X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: The 2017 - 18 School Quality Snapshot An average 99% of positive responses on our Learning Environment survey results regarding outreach to parents and Parent involvement in the school. While this data does not demonstrate an immediate need to improve structures and processes around teacher and parent communication, schoolwide reflections reveal that the ways by which data is shared is not sufficient. A tool or structure must be identified to share student data information with parents more frequently and uniformly throughout the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all PS 38 teachers and staff will communicate student progress via progress reports a minimum of four times this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Utilize the instructional cabinet and grade leaders to support their teams with the identification and use of tools to communicate student grades and schoolwide data around student progress and achievement. all teachers, support staff, service providers November 2018 Parent Coordinator, administration, grade leaders. parents Teachers will utilize 2 Tuesdays a month to call families and update them on student progress. Email will also be used to communicate and update families. Parents, Teachers, students September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Administration, service providers, teachers Teachers will be in communication with service providers, i.e. ENL, Counselors, etc. regarding academic and behavioral concerns on, minimally, a monthly basis to ensure that support is provided and concerns are communicated regularly. Support staff, Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Social Worker, Assistant Principal and Dean 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Mt. Sinai Mental Health facility and Partnerships with Children will also support families and provide an additional layer of services for scholars. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling for parent workshops Scheduling for teacher training (calendar day), 10 Per Diem subs to cover teachers during training Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century X C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 all staff will have had at least 4 informal communications with families regarding progress (behavioral and academic) By February 2019 PS 38 will have provided at least 4 Family Friday sessions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets, Certificates and surveys will serve as the instruments of measure. O.O.R.s reports will also be used to measure impact on student behavior and interactions. Class progress reports will be collected 4x throughout the year, (November 2018, January 2019, March 2019, May 2019) to track student academic progress and progress towards promotion. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students are identified at the beginning of the yearand 2 times in the middle of the year using the following sources of data: Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Reading Tutorial program Individual and Small group (all) During the school day Guided Reading Block Review and Re-Teach after each Interim Assessment During the school day Scholars at level 2 or 1 on N.YSE.L.A.data, in the middleand2 additional times throughout the year via Independent Reading Leveled Assessment and N.Y.C. Performance Task data in grades 1-5 are identified for specific tutorial programs. In addition via the RTI process facilitated by the classroom teacher AIS may also be provided on and on going basis. Students are identified at the beginning of the yearand 2 times in the middle of the Mathematics Review and Re-teach Individual and Small Group During the school day 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) year using the following sources of data:Students who are at level 2 or 1 on eitherN.Y.S.Math data or Go Math pre-requisite and 2 additional times per year via the N.Y.C.Performance Taskdata in grades 1-5 are identified for specific tutorial programs. In addition via the RTI process facilitated by the classroom teacher AIS may also be provided on and on going basis. Level 1 or 2 on Teacher Developed assessment and tasks through out the school year Level 1 or 2 on Teacher Developed assessment and tasks throughout the school year 36% scholars have I.E.P.s, 16% of scholars in Temporary Housing as well as students frequently identified in incident reports from our Online Occurrence Reporting System. Students will be identified on a bi-weekly basis via the Student Intervention Team meetings based on Teacher reports. Push in Personnel Small Group Push in Personnel Small Group During the school day During the school day Academic and socialization groups Small group or individual as needed During the school day Mentoring Individual MountSinai Mental Health Support During the school day and out service support as needed 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 70 actual scholars - 32% Scholars entering from local shelters and doubled up residencies will receive uniforms and school supplies to support their transition into PS 38. Through out the school year teacher observation and feedback will determine social/emotional support services to be provided by our in school mental health staff , Mount Sinai in house CBO and Partnerships with Children (in house CBO). Free dental and medical services are also provided and available for all PS 38 scholars. Academic support and intervention are also provided via Reading Partners, Reading Rescue and Union Settlement all provided one to one at risk and academic intervention service in reading to all scholars particularly scholars in temporary housing. After school academic programs will also be made available to all scholars grades K-5 through various CBO's and in house programs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In addition to reviewing licensure information, perspective candidates are required to provide demonstration lessons and show portfolios that provide a clear picture of their educational philosophy. Mentors are assigned for new teachers and teachers who request additional support as needed. Professional development is provided by teachers and administrators as needed. Literacy and math consultants have been employed to supplement the support currently provided in school during the regular school year. Additional workshops and professional development provided by the borough offices or other agencies/departments (i.e. Office of ENLs, etc.) are available to teacher outside of the school building as needed and/or requested by teachers. Effective and Highly Effective teachers are identified as grade leaders. They lead grade teams and some lead content area teams and represent cohorts with in the administrative cabinet. Other teachers demonstrating Effective or Highly Effective practices are highlighted as models to support teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers meet weekly to discuss curriculum, assessment data and professional practice. The CCLS, content area scope and sequence and Danielson’s Framework are key resources available at each meeting. Standards are used to develop rubrics, review student work products and plan learning activities. Weekly homework sheets are collected and reviewed by administration to ensure that rigorous grade level work is being required of each scholar, grade PK-5. Teachers and administrators are sent out for PD and expected to turn key to either their grade team or the entire staff dependent upon the PD content. Effective and Highly effective classroom practices are shared via the weekly newsletter, staff conferences, or grade team meetings. Teacher Assistants (or Paraprofessionals) receive intense training in the implementation of various academic intervention programs like Reading Rescue and Great Leaps. During the 2018-2019 school year a lead Teacher's 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Assistant has been identified and will receive District and Central level training that she will turnkey to other Teacher Assistants as PS 38. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Professional development is provided to all teachers. These workshops provide teachers with the opportunity to work collaboratively and realize the connections to the standards for each grade level. Pre-K teachers work closely with K teachers to ensure that they are implementing the age and grade appropriate skills needed to better prepare students for Kindergarten. Paraprofessionals attend workshops and trainings with teachers to ensure that they can effectively support scholars. Workshops are also held for parents to inform them of what they should expect throughout this school year in Pre-K and how they can support their scholars in preparing for Kindergarten. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. During the 2017-2018 school year PS 38 revised and implemented a series of protocols for grade level PLCs to review student work, teacher work and student assessment. A grade leader and member of the Instructional Cabinet participated in these sessions to support the grade team with the protocols. They also served as liaisons to communicate schoolwide data to the grade team or relay challenges and strengths that surfaced to discuss on the instructional cabinet. This information was vital to determine how to better support the needs of teachers in professional development or resources for scholars. PS 38 has a tiered assessment structure. Classroom assessments and tasks are developed by the teachers on the grade team and reviewed by the instructional cabinet for feedback. Four times a year teachers administer interim assessments in ELA and Math. Teachers analyze the data and devise action plans for re-teaching. Action plans are reviewed by the members of the instructional cabinet including administration and feedback is provided. During the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  2018-2019 school year teachers will reflect on the reteach and determine the need for focused academic intervention. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 150, 707 16,979 54,938 56, 067 0 0 1,615,558 X X X x na na X Column B Section Reference(s) Section5A - Section 5E Section5A - Section 5E Section5A - Section 5E Section 5A - Section 5E na na Section5A - Section 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45   Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 38 Roberto Clemente, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community.Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. In compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students In acknowledgement of much reliable research proving that parental involvement raises the academic achievement of students, PS 38 encourages involvement of parents through an active Volunteer Program, Family Workshops, School 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Leadership Team, and an active Parent Teacher Association. Parents are encouraged to assist in such activities as: Classroom assistance, workshops, and Parent Teacher Conferences and Parent Literacy & Math workshops. A calendar that includes activities of all of the school’s leadership groups is to be produced annually. This Calendar will include at least one family activity per school month. Parental Involvement and School Quality  Continuous communication to assist parents in understanding the school curriculum and student achievement through News and Notes, PS 38 School Report Card, PS 38 Parent- Handbook, handout, emails, phone calls, mailings and student achievement reports. which will include resource information (i.e., what to know and who to call at the school, local CBOs, helpful websites for families.) Monthly calendars and school newsletters will include parenting tips and suggestions. All invitations will be sent in a timely manner with an additional follow-up reminder.  A school-parent compact designed by parents and school staff that outlines how parents, school staff and students share the responsibility to improve academic skills.  Every year, a survey for all parents shall be conducted by the Department of Education and parent coordinator to collect opinions and concerns of parents about the current program and to collect suggestions for improvement and topics for meetings that meet the needs of parents. Every effort will be made to communicate with parents in a format and language that is free of educational jargon and easily understandable by all. Parents and community member are always to be made welcome at PS 38 Elementary School. In order to build an effective home-school partnership, PS 38 will provide the following: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  An annual orientation meeting where parents will meet their child’s teacher and be educated about their rights and responsibilities and encouraged to be involved in their child’s education.  A flexible number of meetings and activities throughout the year to assist parents in understanding the federal and state academic content and student achievement standards, as well as local academic assessments. The Parent Coordinator in conjunction with administrators and staff will arrange meetings to focus on how parents and teachers can work together to monitor their child’s progress in order to improve student achievement.  A varied schedule for meetings and conferences in order to accommodate the needs of parents.  A minimum of two scheduled Parent Teacher Conferences, where the progress of the student will be discussed as well as the expectations for the grade level, school curriculum, test information and any other concerns that the teacher or parent may have. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Roberto Clemente Learning Center, PS 38 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● Using academic learning time efficiently; ● Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA);  Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships discussed as well as how this Compact is related;  Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting on October 30th of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved;  Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting;  Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year;  Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff English speaking parents;  Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member;  Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians;  Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   2018-19 SCEP-FL 49   Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy;  Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary Education Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs;  Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities and his/her age;  Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary;  Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);   Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; and/or quality family time;  Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;  Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district;  Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;  Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible;  Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;  III. Student Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities:  Attend school regularly and arrive on time;  Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions;  Show respect for myself, other people and property;   Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully;  Always try my best to learn. Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The vision for the CS strategy for the 2018-2019 school year would be to target health and wellness by having the mental health partners (Mount Sinai, school guidance counselor and CBO Partnership with Children) provide services to the school community. For attendance improvement the school and Partnership with Children will increase attendance outreach capacity and further develop new systems to inform our work. Partnership with Children will integrate with the school to implement values and practices to strengthen the culture and core values in the school community. For family engagement, the CBO and school will create a more inclusive environment for families. Lastly, the vision for the Extended Learning Time component would be to integrate civic engagement into all afterschool programming whereby scholars will better understand their role as citizens in the larger community. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P.S. 38 will be a fully functioning Community School. P.S 38 will function as a school that has strong ties between students, families, school staff and the East Harlem community. We will measure our success by meeting our attendance benchmark of 92% and (possible strong ties data) By June 2019 PS 38’s attendance rate will increase 3 percentage points, from 89% to 92% whereby increasing overall student achievement. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? It will provide a stable social emotional environment for students in order for them to be academically prepared. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Partnerships With Children Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Children with attendance rates below 80%, students with disciplinary occurrences, students referred by staff or families Expanded learning time to increase opportunities for student progress and further social emotional development for all scholars and their By June 2019 PS 38’s attendance rate will increase 3 percentage points, from 89% to 92% whereby increasing overall student achievement. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  due to social, emotional, or family obstacles to school performance. Students in temporary housing, students under court supervision or any students who are determined to be in need of such services by social work/PwC staff. families as needed. During the school day service will encompass individual and group counseling, parent/caregiver support groups and services to families including referrals for medical, health, legal, housing and social needs. Initiatives like a “Near peer mentor group” for scholars will also help to enhance student social emotional growth as well as strengthening communities across grades Pk-5. Adult education classes/seminars including “Supporting your child,” are designed to help parents make personal growth. Family support groups will also be developed to provide an outlet for families to express concerns and issues that may be addressed within the school community or outsourced as needed. Common concerns may lead to schoolwide workshops or the employment of other agencies to support larger groups of families within the school community. Additional services will support to develop culture and strengthen 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  community schoolwide: Home visits (total pending) Trips, cultural events and celebrations for students and families Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Partnership with Children to support social and emotional health of students and to provide families with  needed supports. Student Intervention Team (SIT) /Attendance Team to provide process to refer, support and monitor students and families in need of social and emotional supports. Family Night  Grade Teams to monitor and implement supports for students to ensure academic success.   Celebration of Learning  Community Forum Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community 2. 3. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  4. School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. The community school director will synthesize ideas from groups such as the PTA, community school team (CST) and SLT to best support the school’s needs and to essentially add on the capacity already built in the school community. The CSD will work closely with the principal to address those needs and to support the assets already intact. 2. Through strategic planning with the SIT, attendance team etc, Partnership with Children will provide counseling and external resources to children and families given their circumstance. ELT is envisioned to be provided as an afterschool program for the school community. 3. The vision is to engage families and community stakeholders in meetings such as the SLT, PTA, CST and community forums. At these respective meetings, families and community stakeholders will be at the forefront to contribute to decision making when it comes to outcomes affecting them as community members. Families will have a family resource room available in the school building. This will help to sustain the relationship families have in the school community. 4. The utilization of data tools such as the New Visions Data Sorter will be helpful in identifying information that will directly inform best practices for the school community. To elaborate more, filtering for attendance data will yield data that will inform the school on how to categorize students in their respective tier of service. The same data sorter can help the school be informed on which students and families need services based on their housing status, travel distance, IEP status, ELL status etc. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students The Community School Program Implementation will be implemented and overseen by: Carlina Santos Barton, Principal Vanessa Ramos, Assistant Principal Isidro Fortuna, Community School Director Lennys Patino, Parent Coordinator The Community School Program will be monitored through review:  The Data Sorter will be used to track the average weekly attendance meeting goal of 92% or higher. This data will be analyzed by the attendance team (some members listed above) and discussed to strategize the best form of intervention to support individuals as well as groups of scholars.During attendance meetings the team will monitor the Improved individualized attendance for targeted students as well as improved 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  behavior, as evidenced by decreased crises/suspensions. This team will work in conjunction with the SIT. This collaboration will decrease the duplication of services but ensure that specific needs are met for those scholars.  The Family Outreach Worker and other members of PwC will be available to welcome new families and help families understand the role of PwC to support scholars and the family throughout the school year. Collaboration with the school social worker and psychologist will provide information from IEP’s that will help to identify specific support structures. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program.  Teachers for expanded learning time are needed to support academic achievement  CBOs/Organizations to enhance the Expanded Learning Time  Partnership with Children team members to provide additional support as needed to scholars and their families. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The CST will meet monthly September 2018-June 2019. Four meetings, specifically November, february, April and June will be “Check ins,” to evaluate successes and challenges and plan strategic next steps that will best support school wide programs and initiatives outlined in our plan. Student data, teacher anecdotals, and attendance records will be used as tools to show progress or lack thereof. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 39 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Public School 38/ Roberto Clemente proposes to utilize Title III grant funds to create a supplemental program for all ELL’s/LEPs grades 2-5, that would support the acquisition of academic vocabulary. This program will run 2 days a week, 2 hours per day. Instruction will be in English. Two teachers will provide service 1 Special Education teacher and the other certified ENL provider. Through this program, developed in conjunction with Teachers College (via the Astor Grant) scholars will engage in discussions that would sharpen their listening skills and enrich their use of language to relay their thinking. Student portfolios will show improved reading comprehension and writing skills. Analysis of the 2017-2018 NYSESLAT data reveals that while students at PS 38 struggle with all four modalities, the most challenging appear to be listening and writing. Our after-school instructional program will focus on enhancing the school’s regular ESL program in order to encourage and motivate acquisition and learning of cognitive academic language with an opportunity to demonstrate their learning in tasks/projects. We will focus on the community and the various cultures represented in and out of our school community. Scholars will use photos to share their thinking and express their views on what is happening around them. Through this, students are able to learn about many aspects of culture and traditions and its impact on the world around them. Scholars in grades 4 and 5 will be able to reflect on social issues and how they impact their culture and impact in the community. All scholars will engage in discussions and participate in writing activities that will allow them to utilize the vocabulary learned to express their thinking. The photos will help to provide context in this work. This initiative is an enhanced Photo's and Me program that was originally started with Union Settlement and the Astor Foundation. Although the grant is no longer in place, PS 38 will continue to utilize the resources and materials provided (curriculum, cameras, etc.) and make enhancement via trips (community walks to local areas, i.e. museums, parks, book store, etc.) and discussion topics pertinent to 2-4th grade scholars. In grades 2 and 3 there will be up to 15 participants and 1 teacher who has taught the program and received training via the Astor Grant during the original partnership. Grade 4 and 5 (Up to 15 participants)will be taught by another teacher in our school and is familiar with grade level expectation and standards for both grades. In addition, this person has demonstrated their ability to effectively support ENL scholars as they work to improve reading and writing skill in English. Planning time will be provided with the ENL teacher. She will also support each group via small group instruction when scholars are working on tasks and projects. There will also be 1 Supervisor for this program. Teachers will work collaboratively to plan and support each other to teach scholars using a variety of ESL instructional strategies that encourage and further develop basic interpersonal skills while reinforcing academic concepts, skills, and strategies. This program will run 2 hours a session for 38 sessions (From October 2018 to April 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 2019.) Teachers will have 4, 1 hour planning sessions to plan and prepare materials for this program and 1 -2 hour session to review the materials and plan a clear scope and sequence for the program (at no cost to Title III). The Supervisor (at no cost to Title III) will also provide direct support and guidance for these sessions (this occurs during regular DOE contractual hours for the supervisor). Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: In alignment with the City-wide Professional Development vision at no cost to Title III, PS 38 will expedite a three-tiered professional development plan. First, all teachers will be mandated to attend weekly 80 minute sessions of professional development during the school year as per the UFT Contract, of which a minimum of three (3) sessions will be dedicated to developing the teachers’ knowledge of and adeptness in applying ESL methodology and resources. Additional topics to be unpacked via these mandated PD sessions will include: A focus on elements 3b, 3c, and 3d of the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching, at least 2 book studies focused on strategies that enhance the use of student discussion and thinking in all classrooms, and the review of literature and videos that foster the idea of making content more accessible for all learners in the classroom. Said presentations will provide forums by which to present school-wide initiatives to all of the staff. This initial work will then continue to be nurtured, catering to grade-specific concerns, in the context of ongoing follow-up team planning sessions that will take place once or twice each month during the regular school day. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: PS 38 is committed to continuing to develop the solid foundation of parental involvement that has been established in recent years. Therefore, an on-site Parent Coordinator will strive to maintain active communication with the local community, inviting its members to enlist themselves as active, informed team players with a vested interest in the education of their children. The Parent Coordinator will collaborate with the PTA Executive Board to schedule workshops on assorted topics, such as the available educational models for ELLs and their respective benefits. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities The PTA will continue their work as active members of the learning community by participating in periodic learning walks with the professional development team and providing constructive feedback which will then be considered when evaluating the effectiveness of PD at our site. The PTA will also facilitate bi-monthly "Coffee and Breakfast with the Principal" via our Buen Provecho Program. During this time the Principal will avail herself to hold conversations with all interested members of the community regarding the progress of the school, its programs and upcoming events. A series of workshops in the areas of math and literacy will provide parents with the knowledge necessary to help their children succeed. In the area of math, parents will be exposed to different strategies and games to use to make math fun and less threatening for children as well as themselves as the support for their children. Workshops in the area of literacy will include topics such as “Ways to help children increase comprehension through questioning,” “Reading to and with your children,” and “Using daily activities to teach reading strategies and increase vocabulary.” We will also have trips once a month to different museums, cultural institutions and other intriguing places. Parents will be provided with metrocards or a bus will be chartered to go on the many trips. This will take place twice this year. Once in November 2018 and again in March 2019. Through this menu of parental involvement opportunities, we expect that parents will gain the knowledge and confidence necessary to support their children’s achievement, as evidenced through student work products, performance assessments, NYSESLAT, and the annual State assessments. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. na na na Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) na na na  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. na na na na Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL na na na na 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 04 School Name Roberto Clemente Learning Center PS 38 Borough Manhattan School Number 038 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Carlina Santos-Barton Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Cinthia Rodriguez Teacher/Subject Area Lauren Kaye Teacher/Subject Area Ashley Steed Related-Service Provider Nicolette Jaouen Superintendent Alexandra Estrella Assistant Principal NA Coach NA School Counselor Midge Delorise-Harris Parent NA Parent Coordinator Lenny Patino Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other (Name and Title) na C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 214 Total number of ELLs 32 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.95% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 4 0 3 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At PS 38 we utilize the Independent Reading Leveled Assessment tool to assess reading skills. We also use reading and writing performance tasks to assess students literacy mastery. The data provided by the school's is used to identify deficiencies in reading and writing. This data is used to develop instructional groups and to determine the specific skills and strategies needed to support and improve language acquisition for our ENLs and overall academic achievement of all students. Our schoolwide IRLA data indicates that ENL scholars reading below grade level are transitional or expanding as per 2016 NYSESLAT. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Every week teachers are using the IRLA tool to assess students reading levels. This allows to group our English Language Learners in small groups to scaffold and learn specific literacy skills using ENL strategies that best support language acquisition. Moreover, these small grouping allows constant exposure to the English Language in the listening, speaking, reading and writing modalities in their daily. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ELL Periodic Assessments, IRLA, weekly performance tasks and teacher made assessments are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been reviewed, the students are grouped and scheduled for ENL support based on their acquisition levels and needs. Support structures and resources are planned and acquired to support the specific needs of scholars. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] At PS 38 assessments that are administered in the classroom structure as well as City and State assessments help to determine the different supports needed for all scholars. Checks for understanding are done both throughout the lesson and weekly to determine student mastery, grouping and supports needed by teachers regularly. For example at the onset of the 16-17 school year the ENL provider reviewed student NYSESLAT, NYSITELL , State and running records data to develop language goals for each scholar. That information was then used to create groups and devise a schedule that would allow the provider to push-in or pull-out depending the needs and goals of each scholar. When the ENL teacher pushes in she may work in a small group with ELL scholars in need of tier 2 support in the given content area using specific ENL strategies. With other scholars, in need of more intense support, the ENL teacher may utilize materials that will engage a smaller group of ELL scholars on specific strategies i.e. decoding, listening, phonemic awareness. Additional support structures may be needed depending on the level and rate of progress scholars are making on the various data points. Structures for support may include Reading Partners (2-4) or Reading Rescue (1). Additional ENL support may also be provided if it is found that scholars have similar needs although they may be at different grade levels. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT and ELA data are both used to evaluate our ENL program. We find that this information helps to determine initial groupings and structures for ENL service as well as the need for additional support structures. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We currently share the data with teachers via grade team meetings. Monthly meetings with grade level teams around student progress and looking at student work products helps to progress monitor and determine next steps for support for each scholar as well as the group. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. PS 38 has an Integrated Class (ICT) on every grade level and 1 general education class in K and 1. All ELL students are placed in either the general education or ICT (if there are students with an IEP on that grade requiring him or her to be placed in ICT) on the grade to better facilitated the integrated (push in) portion of service. Intermediate and Advanced scholars are grouped together in the following grade bands for service, K, 1-2,3, 4,5. The NYSITELL and the NYSELAT are also used to determine the focus and goals for each scholars. Student's language proficiency, the ENL teachers schedule and student literacy needs will determine additional supports that will be pushed in or pulled out. Students at a higher language proficiency level are grouped for push in and rarely pull-out. Therefore the freestanding ENL program at Ps 38 tailors to the language proficiency of the students. Some groups are heterogeneous and others and homogeneous depending on the language and literacy needs of each scholar. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable in the school. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable at the school. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teacher will work with classroom teachers to ensure that integrated service is provided during literacy instruction for scholars Entering through Transitioning. For scholars identified as Expanding integrated service will take place during science or social studies. Commanding scholars will be grouped with transitioning and or Expanding scholars based on their specific needs and mastery. This may change depending on their literacy power goals. The schedule will then be reviewed with the administrative team and the ENL teacher to ensure that students are receiving the appropriate mandated time as well as consider additional structures that may better support the service to be provided. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL and classroom teachers utilize a variety of approaches to support learners. Visual aides such as process and content charts are posted in all classrooms particularly classrooms with ELLs. Teachers partner scholars to support them in understanding what is happening during each lesson. While all instruction is provided in English, different instructional strategies are used to support language acquisition, i.e. graphic organizers, pictures, labels, etc. These are dependent on student goals and language needs The ENL teacher is trained in programs like Reading Rescue to support scholars in K-2 with specific early literacy and skills. Older scholars focus on comprehension skills via social studies and science to improve content specific vocabulary. Student work products are reviewed against TC writing rubrics or NY State reading rubrics to determine mastery and progress. What content is taught is dependent upon when scholars are pulled out or the ENL teacher is pushing-in. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Assessment in their home language is dependent upon scholars level of acquisition. Resources are available in multiple languages and other support structures are available, i.e. translators (if avialable) to provide help duirng some assesments. In 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  addition, the ENL teacher is an active member of the school's assessment team and works to ensure that the language needs of all scholars are met particularly with assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is dependent upon the level of English Proficiency for each scholar and in which modality they are deficient or strongest. School based assessments, i.e. IRLA, on demand writing tasks, and MYON, will be used to help determine students strengths and needs. A. At this moment there are no current SIFE students, however, in the event that this becomes evident the ENL the teacher will use IRLA and other assessments to determine the students language needs. An action plan will be created and shared with all service providers. SIFE will have specific tailored instruction to help reach their goals. B. Newcomer students are mostly in a pull out model. This allows students to grasp the English Language and understand basics in order to move forward. This model focuses on grammar and interaction amongst peers to better comprehend the different modalities. Scholars with more command of the English language will be supported/serviced dependent on their acquisition levels in the area of deficiency. C/D. For Developing and long term ENL's - A screener, like the STAR or IRLA program will be used to identify specific deficiencies with literacy. An action plan that outlines specific resources and tools will be used to support these scholars. These scholars will be assessed every 4-6 weeks to monitor progress and uncover other deficiencies for support. Tier 2 and 3 RTI may also be part of this plan to ensure that there aren't any learning deficiencies in addition to language acquisition needs. E. Former ELLs groups are in a push in and pull out model. Moreover, the ENL teacher is combining her instruction to enhance their vocabulary, reading and writing skills. Students and the ENL teacher constantly work together side by side to understand the content area. Once students become more and more proficient in the English Language they become more independent. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All of our ELL-SWD’s are in ICT classrooms with two teachers, including a Special Education teacher. In addition, some of our ELL SWD’s receive additional SETSS services, working in small groups on all content areas to either re-teach and/or reinforce skills that have been taught by the classroom teachers. Throughout the day, teachers differentiate instruction based on student needs with the use of scaffolding techniques, graphic organizers and game. In addition, teachers work with students in small groups in every subject area based on student needs. Teachers and students also set short, interim and long-term goals for students in each subject area. These goals, along with the student’s IEP goals and the curriculum scope and sequence, guide teachers in the their instruction. In addition, teachers conference with students on a regular basis in order to monitor progress and track growth. Teachers in all grades use Go Math and differentiate students based on ability levels in small groups on a daily basis. All grades also use the ReadyGen reading curriculum. Students in all grades who are in need of phonics remediation use Wilson’s Fundations program. All of these researched programs are supplemented by teacher-created support tools as mentioned above. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? PS 38 has a ICT class on each grade (K-5) , one 3/4/5 bridge class and 1-2 bridge class. All of our ELL-SWDs are in ICT classes and also ELLs are both in the 2/3 and 4/5 bridge classes. We do not have any 12:1 classes at PS 38. Having our ELLs in ICT classes 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  allows for our ELLs to be in the least restrictive environment. As stated above, PS 38 follows ReadyGen reading/writing curriculum and Go Math in grades K-5. Although these are structured programs, teachers are required to differentiate using a variety of materials and resources from reading books, computer literacy programs like Imagine Learning or other teacher made materials i.e. graphic organizers. Teacher use many of these resources in small groups to better support scholars. This flexibility allows teachers, including the ENL and SETSS teacher to meet instructional goals in student's learning. Additionally, the SETSS, ENL and other special needs service providers work with the classroom teachers in order to make a schedule that, when possible, best fits the student’s and the teacher’s needs, making sure to support the classroom to work on skills that are aligned with a student's individual needs as well as support instructional outcomes for the lesson. Finally, the ESL teacher and other service providers articulate with teachers on the progress that their students are making and set new learning goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted interventions include an integrated model for support of all ELLs in ELA and Math by an AIS teacher in addition to an integrated model support for ENL services. Enrichment teachers also pull out scholars during a 40 minute guided reading block 3 days a week based on reading levels and specific skill in Reading during the instructional day in the targeted language; English. The students are assessed at various intervals of performance. Students scoring at benchmark levels are assessed every 4-6 weeks on targeted skills, strategic students are assessed monthly and intervention students are assessed every two weeks. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? MyON is a program being considered to support our ELL scholars not making the progress this year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? As of now we do not have a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All scholars are invited to participate in all academic and enrichment programs including ELLs and SWD's. Our partnership with Union Settlement invites all scholars, specifically our ENL scholars to participate i our Photos and Me program. This program works specifically with ELL's to support language acquisition. This program is for scholars grade 2. The Achievers Program for scholars grades 4 and 5 focus on literacy and math. All scholars especially our ENL scholars are invited to participate. Any other programs are made available to all PS 38 scholars. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Each classroom grade K-5 is equipped with at least 2 desktop computers and a smartboard to provide visual support and foster student engagement. Each teacher is given 3-5 ipads with headsets so that all scholars specifically ENL scholars, can listen to to stories in English and their native language. ELMO's are also in each classroom to provide visual models for all scholars. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? DL and TBE are not available programs at PS 38. Home Language in our ENL program is assessed via conversation, on-demand writing tasks and reading passages (if available in the home language). The delivery of service in the home language is dependent on the scholars level of English language acquisition. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL teacher meets with the administrative team regularly to discuss student progress and any schedule changes. She also participates in the Special Education committee when we discuss ELL students at risk. Based on anecdotals provided by both the ENL and classroom teacher, AIS is provided and monitored regularly. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? PS 38 share common spaces with a charter school. The Building Utilization Plan is used to ensure that each school has equal access to common spaces. The spaces are used to provide mandated service, i.e. gym, lunch, as well as school based initiatives like community celebrations and character building programs. The principal meets with the building counsel monthly to discuss the calendar of events and other needs or concerns in the building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The parent coordinator and guidance counselor meet with families to share details about our school culture and services that may be available to support the families. We are going to implement a meet and greet where parents are welcome to discuss, celebrate and collaborate to better facilitate the newcomers students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer any language electives at PS 38. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable at this moment. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers at PS 38 are teachers of ENL scholars. The current PD consist of 6-8 cycles. Several new teachers were hired for the 17-18 school year as a result the first cycle consist of reviewing protocols for team meetings, looking at student work and norming. The next cycle of PD will consist of different topics that have been introduced to continuing staff members and will be made available to new staff members i.e. a book study on Making Thinking Visible. The other topics in this cycle will include Cognitively Guided Instruction in Math and Self-Regulated Strategy Development's in writing for teachers that have not been trained. The next cycle will be dependent on teacher requests and what teacher evaluations deem necessary. Each of these PD's will help to enhance instruction and support all scholars including ELL's and SWD's. PD focused on ENL strategies and supports, particularly for newer staff members will include support and guidance by the ENL provider and the Instructional Cabinet. The ENL teacher has provided and will continue to support teachers with information, resources and instructional skills that will support all scholars, especially English language learners. In August 2018 she provides a workshop for our office staff and enrollment team on the importance of the HILS form and registration; In September she discussed how to set up classrooms to support our ELs iat PS 38. In October she reviewed the NYSESLAT and engaged teachers in a discussion around how to enhance speaking and listening skills in the literacy classroom. In December and January the ENL teacher will support early childhood classrooms with support structures in writing for all scholars. In March and April she will be collaborating with teachers to include centers and tasks that focus on the speaking and listening modalities. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL teacher has provided and will continue to support teachers with information, resources and instructional skills that will support all scholars, especially English language learners. In August 2018 she provides a workshop for our office staff and enrollment team on the importance of the HILS form and registration; In September she discussed how to set up classrooms to support our ELs iat PS 38. In October she reviewed the NYSESLAT and engaged teachers in a discussion around how to enhance speaking and listening skills in the literacy classroom. In December and January the ENL teacher will support early childhood classrooms with support structures in writing for all scholars. In March and April she will be collaborating with teachers to include centers and tasks that focus on the speaking and listening modalities. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Translators and/or translation services are made available for conferencing with parents as needed. The annual meeting is scheduled weekly as needed in September and then within 10 days for newly enrolled scholars. Teachers are available weekly to discuss student progress, translation services are available as needed. All other workshops, community celebrations, monthly parent meetings are open to all families. Translation is available as needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Monthly meetings are held to engage all parents in academic activities. PS 38 is working diligently to increase parental involvement and will be providing multiple opportunities to invite parents in to share in the work scholars do daily as well as celebrate their success. All this in addition to workshops being provided to enhance the health and well-being of their child(ren) and their families. During the 2018-2018 each grade cohort (k-2 and 3-5) will participate in Classroom Presentations where parents and their children will be asked to work on tasks together and present to the classroom community. Parents will also be invited to participate in a bi-weekly breakfast where they will learn to make healthy eating options for their children as well as discuss schoolwide concerns with the school's administration and Parent Coordinator. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Carlina Santos-barton, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 38 School DBN: 04M038 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Carlina Santos-Barton Principal Donna Montaque Assistant Principal Lennys Patino Parent Coordinator Cinthia Rodriguez ENL/Bilingual Teacher NA Parent Vanessa Ramos Teacher/Subject Area NA NA NA Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach MIdge Delorise Harris School Counselor Alexandra Estrella NA NA NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other NA Other NA Other NA 6/29/16 6/29/16 6/29/16 6/29/16 6/29/16 6/29/16 6/29/16 6/29/16 6/29/16 6/29/16 6/29/16 6/29/16 6/29/16 6/29/16 6/29/16 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 04M038 School Name: PS38 Superintendent: A. Estrella The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Cinthia Rodriguez ESL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Home Language Surveys as well as emergency contact cards and school surveys are used to determine language dominance of both students and parents. Moreover, when parents come in for formal or informal conferences language dominance is also determined. Every attempt is made to communicate with parents in their home language. Spanish interpretations are available at the school level in notices provided by the teacher and the school. Central Translation services have been used to translate forms and letters in languages other than English as well. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Arabic Urdu 155 36 2 1 79.9 18.56 1.03 .52 156 36 0 1 80.41 18.56 0 .52 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent/Student Manuel, School notices for holidays Etc. As needed through out the year PTA notice, calendar, SLT notices, community and cultural events notices, Awards Assemblies, workshop notices, Parent workshops, Coffee with the Principal Monthly parent-teacher conferences notices, after school programs notices, NYS testing dates, As needed through out the year Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Coordinator and Principal, or school secretary draft the notice and another staff member (Parent coordinator, ENL teacher or Principal) translates the document for printing and distribution. Parent Coordinator, PTA exec board or school secretary draft the notice and another staff member (Parent coordinator, ENL teacher or Principal) translates the document for printing and distribution. Parent Coordinator or school secretary draft the notice and another staff member (Parent coordinator, ENL teacher or Principal) translates the document for printing and distribution. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  Parental Engagement meetings bi-weekly, Parent Coordinator or school secretary draft the notice and another staff member (Parent coordinator, ENL teacher or Principal) translates the document for printing and distribution. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Night in , IEP meetings when needed, September Parent teacher Conferences in November, March and May, interpretation service(s)? Parent Coordinator or school secretary draft the notice and another staff member (Parent coordinator, ENL teacher or Principal) translates the document for printing and distribution. Additional translation may be provided via translator if available. Parent Coordinator or school secretary draft the notice and another staff member (Parent coordinator, ENL teacher or Principal) translates the document for printing and distribution. Additional translation may be provided via translation services. NA NA NA NA NA NA 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use School Messenger for immediate contact to all parents. Messages are translated in Spanish for both school Schoolcnxt and School Messenger. If needed emergency messages will be provided in the other languages represented at PS 38, i.e. Arabic and Urdu. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The document will be reviewed with staff in September and a full copy will send via email to all staff. Additional questions may be addressed during the overview of the document and further addressed as needed. Information will be provided to staff in October regarding immediate translation services via telephone by the ENL teacher. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) School safety plan will include procedure that ensures that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school's administrative offices solely due to language barriers. School and offices will post in a conspicuous location at or near the primary entrance a sign in each of the covered languages or the most prominent covered language indicating the availability of interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school conducts quarterly school wide surveys. At functions such as pot lucks and other gatherings we have staff that have informal conversations with parents that find out their opinion on the quality of the school and school services. Surveys are made available in Spanish and if written, in Arabic. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74 
