 02M040 School Name: P.S. 040 AUGUSTUS SAINT-GAUDENS Principal: SUSAN FELDER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS 40 310200010040 PK – 5 320 East 20 th Street 212-475-5500 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 02M040 212-475-5388 Fax: School Contact Person: Email Address: Marie Eng meng@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Susan Felder Stacy Bartlett Carla O'Connor Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Graham White Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: n/a n/a n/a Geographical District: 2 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Bonnie Laboy Superintendent: 333 Seventh Avenue blaboy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3815 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: 212-356-3702 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 Seventh Avenue YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-705-5856 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Susan Felder Graham White Carla O'Connor n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Mollie Rosen David McRae Angelica Gonzalez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Amanda Stradling FlorieHuppert Judy Gruver PantaSchaffer n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview P.S. 40 is dedicated to the three inter-related concepts of academic excellence, social responsibility and student self-esteem. This philosophy drives instruction and the way everyone at P.S. 40 lives together as a community. We are a multi-cultural and multi-ethnic community where administrators work with parents, teachers and children to fulfill   the school’s mission of providing a nurturing, supportive and academically rigorous learning environment for each child. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We promote academic excellence and achievement and enhance self-esteem through standards-driven instruction. We achieve this mission using a collaborative and interdisciplinary approach to learning in which students participate in inquiry-based work within a clearly articulated, developmentally appropriate curricular framework. Students are encouraged to think critically, and appreciate literature and mathematics. Social studies, science and the arts (visual and performing arts) are integral parts of the curriculum. Core classroom subjects in reading, writing, math, science and social studies are strengthened by the inclusion of music, art, physical education, and technology. Leadership opportunities for upper grade students, such as conflict resolution/peer mediation, student council and monitors are ways we emphasize social responsibility among our student body. Community is the school-wide integrated social studies theme that spirals up through the grades as students move from the concepts of home and neighborhood to a broader understanding of one’s country and world. The theme of community is included both in the curriculum and in the school environment and culture. Community is reinforced in the curriculum through the inclusion of outside enrichment resources, including visiting authors, collaboration with arts institutions and social studies/historical resources, as well as field trips that complement the curriculum. High quality arts programs are integral to the learning experience at P.S. 40. Full-time visual art and music teachers provide students with outstanding and comprehensive programs that range from arts projects employing multiple media to choral and instrumental music. Grades 1–5 participate in PTA-sponsored arts residencies focused on dance and dramatic arts in collaboration with outside organizations including National Dance Institute, Marquis Studio, Dancing Classrooms, among others. Children celebrate their artistic accomplishments through exhibitions and performances open to the whole school community. P.S. 40 serves the Gramercy, Peter Cooper-Stuyvesant Town, Flatiron, and adjacent areas. It occupies the first three floors of two connected buildings. One of them—a century-old five-story building—is also home to the Salk Middle School, which has almost 400 students in grades 6 through 8. Both schools share an auditorium, lunchroom, a courtyard and other common spaces. Currently P.S. 40 has 24 classrooms, a computer lab, science lab, music room, art room, library, and rooftop playground. We anticipate opening a 25th classroom for 2018-2019 school year. P.S. 40 has two full-day pre-kindergarten classes and expects to have five kindergartens, five first grades, four second grades, four third grades, three fourth grades, and three fifth grades. The average class size in the lower grades (K–2) is 25. In grades 3–5 the average class size is 30. In 2014, P.S. 40 was selected to participate in the citywide composting initiative, and students on the Eco-Team were trained in how to teach their fellow students to separate compostable breakfast and lunch waste. In addition, the PTA is supporting the Wellness in the Schools program (WITS), spearheaded by the PTA’s Wellness Committee to inspire healthy eating, environmental awareness and fitness. WITS provides an alternative lunch menu, including a salad bar, regular tastings from the WITS chef and a partnership with a parent chef for cooking demonstrations. Parent involvement is an essential component to life at P.S. 40. Success depends upon collegial and productive collaboration among teachers, administrators, specialists, support staff, members of the surrounding neighborhood and parents who are important partners in the education of all P.S. 40 students. An active PTA brings together the community through school events and fund-raisers, as well as regular participation in classroom events, open school week, parent-teacher conferences, performances and other special events and lectures. One area of focus is increasing attendance at PTA meetings; meeting times alternate between morning and evening to accommodate 0  parent schedules. The PTA’s executive board and principal are considering a number of ideas to encourage participation. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our SwD and ENL student populations have grown in the last few years. Language and academic instruction are provided according to the students' needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The school’s 2016-2017 Quality Report indicates a well-developed school where leaders and staff have made purposeful decisions to offer rich curricula aligned to the CCLS with emphasis on coherence, access for all learners and strong teacher teams. Teachers consistently analyze assessments to inform instruction, guiding student awareness of next learning and the steps leading to increased mastery. Collaborative leadership, the school’s inquiry work, and implementation of the CCLS-aligned curricula have improved test scores that are significantly above citywide and state averages with notable increases in fourth grade students achieving level 4 grades in both ELA and Math exams in 2017-2018 over the prior year's results. We are proud of receiving above average on all domains of our school’s 2017 Learning Environment Survey. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M040 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 673 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 23 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 27 10 23 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 9.0% 8.8% 3.1% % Attendance Rate % Reduced Lunch % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 14.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 61.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.25 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 88.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 98% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 79 78 96.0% 0.6% 15.9% 1.5% 11.9% 10.8% 2 3% 6 88.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. One of our strengths is that our teachers have high expectations of student learning and outcomes. The science teacher has been working with the NYCDOE Science Leadership Team to align the NYC Scope and Sequence with the new NYS P-12 Science Learning Standards. In 2017-2018 one of our science goals was to align the STEM curriculum taught in our school with the new NYS P-12 Science Learning Standards. In the 2018-2019 school year we have opted-in to the DOE recommended science curriculum developed by Amplify Science. Our goal will be to fully implement Amplify Science with a focus on the well-developed literacy aspect of the new curriculum. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of science lessons taught in the Science Special (Grades 2–5) will be fully aligned with NYC DOE recommended Amplify Science curriculum, with at least 25% of the lessons having a central literacy focus. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The science teacher will work with the NYCDOE Science Leadership Team to research, plan and present Professional Development regarding the Amplify Science curriculum and turnkey the content to staff during the PD time to build teacher capacity. Teachers (Science and PK-5) September 2018–June 2019 Science teacher/STEM coordinator, literacy coordinator, math coordinator, administrators Science teacher/STEM coordinator, math coordinator, administrators October 2018–May 2019 September 2018 – May 2019 Science teacher/STEM coordinator, math coordinator, administrators Specialty teachers, along with grade level teachers, will engage in PD sessions based on connecting their cross-content curricula to develop one unit of study, on one grade level, that aligns with the Amplify Science curriculum Teachers will engage parents with the Amplify Science focused method of teaching through parent workshops and family newsletters. Specialty Teachers (art, music, digital media, physical education) Science teachers, classroom teachers, parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Science newsletters will be sent home monthly. Also, a bi-monthly newsletter is sent home which includes articles from the principal or other key staff about instruction. Parent workshops may also be provided on targeted subjects as needed. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Amplify Science kits and consumables, science teachers, Amplify Science PD including sub coverage. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 4  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 50% of the science lessons taught will be aligned to the Amplify Science curriculum. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Observations, student work/presentations, teacher plans, attendance sheets from parent engagement and rigorous PD for staff. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? During the 2017/2018 school year, the PS40 special education teachers began working with a staff developer from TCICP to develop strategies and supports for students with executive functioning challenges in the classroom. Through the positive effects of this work, members of the special education staff felt that continued work with both special educators and the general education teachers would be beneficial for all students, including those with executive functioning challenges. Through ongoing support from a TCCP staff developer all members of the PS40 staff will participate in staff development and increase their understanding of executive functioning and how to support students in the classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, ICT partnerships will begin implementing learned executive functioning support strategies in their classrooms. This work began during the 2017/2018 school year and will continue during the 2018/2019 school year via staff meetings, parent workshops. This will be measured through documentation shared by ICT teachers at grade level meetings in February and June, including checklists indicating strategies used. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? TCICP staff developer will lead on-going workshops with ICT teams. ICT teachers September 2018–June 2019 One time per month, at a weekly grade level meeting, the special education teacher will share executive functioning strategies that he/she has learned and successfully implemented in his/her classroom. Teachers will have the opportunity to ask questions and share any strategies or supports that they have tried or successfully implemented. Special education teachers and ICT general education teachers September 2018–June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, special education liaison, IEP teacher Principal, Assistant Principal, special education teachers, IEP teacher . Parents will participate in a workshop provided by the TCICP staff developer and/or PS 40 teacher(s). Parents November 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, IEP teacher, parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will speak to parents, as needed, about supporting children with executive functioning challenges. A parent workshop will be provided on executive function. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TCICP, books and materials. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, every teacher will be able to identify at least one strategy or support has been put in place in his or her classroom. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Classroom environment, IEPs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 40 is a highly collaborative community where teachers work together to develop rigorous, engaging instruction for a diverse range of learners. Teachers have a strong literacy understanding and have high expectations of student learning and outcomes. We implement the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Units of Study. Since the advent of focused genres, the writing notebooks have been used primarily for generating genre-specific entries. Our recent CEP goal focusing on math through vertical teacher teams is a perfect segue into a vertical focus on writing notebooks. Teachers will work in grade-level and vertical teams to plan for lessons and strategies on repeated practice and volume Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, grade-level and vertical teams in Grades 3-4 will effectively use the writer's notebook as a place for repeated practice and increased volume across the writing process as evidenced by 70% of students increasing per-unit volume of writing in their writer's notebooks. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The year will launch with the grades 3-4 classroom teachers using the 80 minute professional development time in September and October to work with staff developers and plan the writing volume goal, including a focus on using tools, exemplars and partnerships. Our upper grade TC staff developer will use her/his professional time with teachers to plan for teaching writer's notebook elaboration strategies. S/he will model lessons and study student work with the teachers as part of her/his residency. Professional reading will guide teachers’ understanding and practice. Books such as Jack Gantos' Writing Radar will be used as springboards for conversations among teachers as they engage in professional development. The reading material will serve as guides for teaching and learning. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018–October 2018 October 2018–June 2019 Literacy staff developer, Teachers College staff developers, teachers and administrators Literacy staff developer, TC staff developer, teachers and administrators October 2018 – May 2019 Literacy staff developer, teachers and administrators Teachers 3- 5, literacy Staff developer Literacy staff developer, Teachers, TC staff developer ESL teacher Literacy staff developer, classroom teachers, parents How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly newsletters are sent to families from classrooms teachers. Copies of the classroom letters are submitted to the office. Also, a bi-monthly newsletter is sent home which includes articles from the principal or other key staff about instruction. Parent workshops on writer's notebooks will be led by our literacy staff developer. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Literacy Staff Developer, Teachers College Staff Developers, Teachers College workshops, Per Diem coverage for inter-visitations and workshops, materials needed to construct meaningful lessons. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 0  X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, classroom teachers in grades 3-4 will track the number of entries in their writer's notebooks to determine whether 50% of their students have increased per-unit writing volume. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Volume of writing per unit will be used to assess progress towards this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. One strength of our school is collaboration between students and teachers. With teacher guidance and support students are empowered to take ownership of their learning. We see an opportunity to display more student thinking, their learning process, and independence throughout the school. With these in place students and teachers throughout the school will gain a better understanding of the steps children take to achieve a goal. The students will take ownership and the teacher will transfer responsibility to the student. We will build on the 2017-2018 goal of student-created, interactive bulletin boards, portfolios, rubrics, self-assessments, or reflections that demonstrate the learning process by implementing more student directed learning opportunities including student led read alouds, and student led expert groups. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of classrooms will implement at least one of the following student-directed learning opportunities within each ELA literacy cycle: student created bulletin boards, student-directed read alouds, student-led expert groups, as observed during walk-throughs, formal observations, and/or peer inter-visitations. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom teachers who have integrated student-directed learning opportunities will help guide other teachers in this process through mentorship, inter-visitations, and book clubs. K–5 students September 2018–May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers Through inquiry-driven instruction students will teach others by leading read alouds, sharing their ideas on charts and bulletin boards, and teaching peers through work in expert groups using the book "Kids First From Day One" as a resource Teachers will ensure that students give constructive feedback to classes throughout the school by adding comments and questions to bulletin boards created by other classes. A parent workshop will include information on student-directed learning opportunities. Throughout the year parents are encouraged to view student-directed learning opportunities during Open School Week, parent teacher conferences, and school tours, etc. K–5 students October 2018–May 2019 K–5 students, Students, Teachers K–5 students, Students, Teachers K-5 teachers, students, parents, Principal, Assistant Principal K–5 students October 2018–May 2019 September 2018- June 2019 K-5 teachers, students, Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Letters are sent to families weekly (K) and monthly (1-5). Copies of the classroom letters are submitted to the office. Also, a bi-monthly newsletter is sent home which includes articles from the principal or other key staff about instruction. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Classroom teachers and materials . Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 3  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February, the Principal and Assistant Principal will meet with Grade Liaisons and Specialty Teachers to monitor progress. Rubric-based documentation will serve as evidence that at least one student-directed activity has been attempted in 50% of classrooms. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Checklists and rubrics will be used to document and assess observed student-driven activities and environmental indicators. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the Learning Environment Surveys for the past three years, teachers and families feel that P.S. 40 is a supportive environment. To continue building upon and strengthening student character development within a supportive environment, we have implemented an instructional focus that provides our students with the skills to become successful individuals. This work builds on previous CEP goals and professional reading by teachers and parents including Kristine Mraz and Christine Hertz's, A Mindset for Learning and Kids 1st From Day 1. As a school, we built upon a common language among children to help them manage challenges both academically and inter-personally. Continuing this theme, P.S. 40 will continue to foster a healthy growth mindset in learners and educate parents on ways to support their children in school and at home Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of the classes will implement the five stances (empathy, flexibility, persistence, resilience, and optimism) to create a classroom culture which fosters a growth mindset as observed in formal observations and school climate walk-throughs. In addition, teachers will regularly inform parents about classroom activities centered around the stances and provide opportunities for parents to provide feedback. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will continue to incorporate Book of the Month to support the various stances school-wide. Every other month, teachers will read aloud and discuss with the students a book related to one of the stances. PK–5 students September 2018–June 2019 Professional Development committee, administrators, teacher leaders All teaching staff September During the first half of the year, teachers will highlight specific stances in their individual classrooms and implement activities (discussions, read-alouds, student self-reflection) that deepen student understanding and application of the growth mindset stances. During the second half of the academic year, the school community will share examples of how students have used specific stances in their academic and personal experiences in a school community bulletin board. K–5 students, teachers, parents PD committee, staff developers, administration Principal and classroom teachers Lead teachers, administration 2018–February 2019 February 2019–June 2019 October 2018–May 2019 February 2019-June 2019 Administrators and Science and Media Literacy Teachers Throughout the year, through newsletters, letters, and workshops, teachers will inform parents about the stances highlighted in their individual classrooms and share examples of how their children are using the stances in school. Cluster teachers, service providers, paraprofessionals, school aides, office staff Teachers will provide parents with the opportunity to also share how their children are using the stances at home. Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. n/a Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 6  Books will be ordered each month for each classroom and professional books will be purchased for continued adult learning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, each classroom will have read at least three books of the month and show evidence of a growth mindset classroom culture. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Charts, bulletin boards displays, newsletters, student self-reflection, parent feedback Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Services are determined based on school wide structures including: teacher recommendations; assessments such as, running records; test scores; previous holdover lists. The intervention team meets to make decisions based on the data. They reconvene every six weeks to reassess and make necessary changes. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Shared reading, guided reading, readers’ theatre and conferring are used to practice decoding and develop comprehension strategies, such as, retelling, inferring, questioning, visualizing, fluency, etc. Assessments are given throughout the year. Interactive and shared writing are used to build skills, confidence and stamina. Reading Rescue and Great Leaps programs are implemented in first and second grades. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tier 1 intervention is provided by classroom teachers. In addition we have the following supports in place for tier 2 intervention: Service for first and second grade receiving one- on-one or small group instruction is provided daily during the school day. Service is provided three to four times per week during the school day for 3rd grade. Fourth and fifth grade reading intervention group is provided three times a week during the school day. Reading Rescue is provided for second grade four times per week during the school day. First and second grade students receive one-on-one or small group (determined by the level of need) instruction in an intensive reading intervention program, such as Reading Recovery and Fundations. In third grade students receive small group instruction in reading, writing. A subgroup of students who are not ELLs but come from a home where English is not the first language, receives literacy support from our ESL teacher. A fourth and fifth grade reading group 8  Mathematics Science Social Studies for students who need work on decoding, meets three times a week with an out of classroom teacher who previously taught upper grades. Tier 1 intervention is provided by classroom teachers. Students are supported in small groups. Teacher and math coordinator collaborate to plan and implement lessons that meet specific needs of each student. Math coordinator pushes in to each fourth and fifth grade classroom two times per week. Small group Students practice skills learned in class with additional support. They use supplemental models and tools to help better understand concepts taught. Math games, fluency activities and strategy groups that support skills are played and assessments are given throughout the year. Concrete and pictorial models are used to develop and support new understandings. Science intervention is done in conjunction with our literacy support. We utilize non-fiction texts to support students in research and study skills. Service is provided two times per week during the school day. Planning time is set for SETSS teacher to meet with the science teacher to ensure that the small group intervention is targeted to the curriculum as well as the needs of the individual students. Instruction is provided for small groups of students throughout the school day. Social Studies intervention is done in conjunction with Small group The intervention and special education teachers meet to Services are determined based on school-wide data including: teacher recommendations; test scores; assessments, such as exit tickets, mid unit and end unit assessments; previous holdover lists. The intervention team meets to make decisions based on the data. They reconvene every six weeks to reassess and make necessary changes. Services are determined based on school-wide data including: teacher recommendations; test scores; unit assessments; previous holdover lists. The intervention team meets to make decisions based on the data. They reconvene every six weeks to reassess and make necessary changes. Services are determined based on ELA data, particularly 9  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) plan for differentiated instruction for small groups of students throughout the school day. Small group and one-on-one services are provided as needed by our social workers and school psychologist. These services are provided during the school day on an as- needed basis. focused on non-fiction texts. The intervention team meets to make decisions based on the data. They reconvene every six weeks to reassess and make necessary changes. Services are determined based on teacher recommendations to PPT as well as historical data. our literacy support. We utilize non-fiction texts to support upper grade students in transitioning from learning to read to reading to learn. Repeated reading and early exposure to texts is one strategy used to grow comfort and confidence in new material. Students work in small groups to develop social skills with peers; learn anger management techniques; develop conflict resolution skills; and learn strategies for dealing with anxiety, stress and distressing life issues. 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 1 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  intervention 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We will use the $4,007. funds to provide basic emergency supplies (e.g., clothing, school supplies, books, glasses, etc.) and other educational services (e.g., counseling services, intervention programs) so that STH students have opportunities to progress academically. 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 3  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 4  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 40, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S 40 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 6  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 7  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S 40, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 8  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 9  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act; Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 0  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 1  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name Augustus Saint-Gaudens Borough Manhattan School Number 040 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Susan Felder Coach Erika Salzman/Math ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sara Shafaee Teacher/Subject Area William Owen/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Graham White/Science Related-Service Provider Samantha Olshever/SETSS Superintendent Bonnie Laboy Assistant Principal Stephanie Lukas Coach N/A School Counselor Lisa Manger Parent Tricia Ryan/Dara Cohen Parent Coordinator Juliette Knight Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Broughton Other (Name and Title) Maria Pabon/School Aide C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 3  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 699 Total number of ELLs 30 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.29% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): n/a If yes, indicate language(s): n/a Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Lang. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS 40 uses the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT and TCRWP--Teachers College Reading and Writing Project assessment to guide instructional planning for ELLS. The assessment has indicated some interesting patterns.There is a strong correlation between the NYSESLAT scores in reading and the comprehension scores on the TC assessment. However, when one does a complete item analysis, it is clear that ELLs, whose comprehension is on or near grade level, may still be struggling with vocabulary and/or spelling. In addition, ELLs who score at entering, emerging, and transitioning levels on the NYSESLAT may also score below grade level on the TCRWP assessment. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 4  In order to support the effort of assessment, the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher take the necessary steps aligning the CCLS, Common Core Learning Standards, to their lesson plan and creating meaningful, effective lessons to support struggling ELLs in language growth. Teachers meet every two weeks after school to discuss students' progress and collaborate on how to support these students. Classroom and ENL teachers work with students in small groups on the skills that pose a challenge. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? PS 40 uses the NYSESLAT and Teacher College Running Records (MoSL) - Measures of Student Learning assessments. We evaluate the success of our ENL program by assessing how many years it takes for our ELLs to score commanding/proficient on the NYSESLAT or a 3-4 on the NYS ELA and math tests. We compare this data to the outcome of students' performance on the MoSL and final report card grades given at the end of the year. Based on the data from the last 10 years, most newcomer ELLs who enter in kindergarten have reached a level of commanding/proficient on the four NYSESLAT modalities by the end of second grade. That being said, newcomer ELLs who enter after kindergarten (first or second grade) reach a commanding/proficient level of proficiency by the second year at PS 40 if they are literate in their native language. Newcomer ELLs in grades three to five have shown growth in all four modalities on the NYSESLAT, but a level of commanding/proficient by the end of one academic school year has not been reached regardless of the ELLs' commanding literacy level in their native language. Newcomer ELLs who are adopted and whose home language is now English also reach a level of commanding/proficient on the listening, speaking and reading parts of the NYSESLAT, SIFE students being the exception of that outcome. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? In order to support the effort of intervention, the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher meet to discuss ELLs progress. Intervention strategies are discussed and a plan of action to implement strategies while keeping in mind the CCLS. Teachers meet on grade level to discuss students progress and current needs every two weeks after school. We also address the needs of ENL students at our weekly Pupil Personnel Team meetings. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] At PS 40 we review the data from both summative and formative assessments, and from in-class observations. Teachers will call upon the Pupil Personal Team (see above) for further intervention of ELLs are falling below benchmark. The PPT is composed of the principal, assistant principal, ENL teacher, school social worker, school psychologist, speech therapist, occupational therapist, SETSS tacher, a general education teacher, and a special education teacher. The team meets weekly in order to implement effective interventions for students including struggling language learners. Progress is monitored and academic decisions are made based on the data from periodic assessments, on-demand writing assessments, and teacher observations while keeping linguistic diversity in mind. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. PS 40 uses both the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores (take from ELL Data Analysis Tool and the RLAT) when organizing ELL programs. All ELLs receive required units of ENL service. Minutes are determined by NYSITELL or NYSESLAT score as per the requirements of CR Part 154.2 The data patterns across proficiency levels on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT reveal that students in kindergarten and first grade who score expanding on the NYSITELL in the fall and remain in the same ENL program for the entire school year are more likely to score commanding on the NYSESLAT in the spring. Students in grades two through five who score expanding or transitioning on the NYSITELL in the fall tend to score expanding on the NYSESLAT. Students in grades kindergarten and first who score entering or emerging on the NYSITELL in the fall tend to score expanding on the NYSESLAT; often times commanding proficiency levels are reached in speaking, listening and reading by the spring, but writing levels do not grow as rapidly. However, students in grades two through five who score entering, emerging, and transitioning on the NYSITELL may continue to score transitioning on the writing modality, but expanding or commanding on all other modalities. 5  Rarely do entering or emerging ELL students reach a level of commanding in all modalities of the NYSESLAT by the end of their first school year or by the spring. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The members of the LAP team use the ELL Data Analysis Tool and the RLAT from ATS to determine which students require service. The LAP team meets to determine scheduling of required minutes is complete and sufficient before the start of the school year. The ENL teacher and other LAP team members will monitor the RLAT and ELLO screen bi-weekly to make sure compliance as been met. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction for all ELLs is delivered in English in small group instruction, both heterogeneously and homogeneous. In the general education classroom, ELLs are placed in groups according to their English language proficiency based on either the NYSESLAT or the NYSITELL, as well as the data from the classroom teacher’s TCRWP assessment. This information from both ENL teacher and classroom teacher help make effective decision as to how to instruct their ELL(s). Depending on the activity, different types of groupings, homogeneous or heterogeneous will help ELLs achieve specific goals. When possible all emerging students are paired with a child who speaks and understands the ELLs’ home language if the classroom teacher is unable to communicate in that language. Classroom instruction includes: For example in the second grade the social studies unit begins with the study of New York City, the ENL teacher and classroom teacher may choose to study some of the students’ native cities in order to help ELLs make the necessary connections to their life experiences. Both the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher use the Teachers College Units of Study in Reading and Writing to help align their work with their beginner ELLs. One of the strategies that has proved successful and is used to build vocabulary with the intermediate and advanced ELLs is “shades of meaning.” During read aloud and word study students may come across words they are not familiar with. The ENL teacher then defines the word(s) by adding two or three words the children are familiar with. This is done with student input; they potentially choose the words in context. The words can be acted out or illustrated. Across the grades, range from expanding to emerging, therefore they are serviced using both pull-in and push-out models since the NYSESLAT indicated that writing is where they struggle. Students are pulled out of their classroom for 180 minutes for a more tailored instruction. The program models include homogeneous grouping for children in expanding and transitional levels who may still need support and heterogeneous grouping for students in entering and emerging levels if they are within grades kindergarten through second. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 6  The staff works together to organize the master school schedule to meet the needs of our ELLs. Our entering and emerging receive 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction. Of those 360 minutes 1 unit (180 minutes) will be dedicated to ENL and 1 unit (180 minutes) is dedicated to ENL/ELA. Our transitioning and expanding ELLs will receive 180 minutes per week as per CR Part 154.2. Of those 180 minutes, .5 units will be dedicated to ENL/ELA (90 minutes) and .5 units will be dedicated to integrated ENL/content area (90minutes). We will meet the mandated minutes of instruction mandated by CR Part 154.2 by using both the pull-out model and the push-in model. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content area is delivered in English either during classroom time using the push-in model or the pull-out model with the ENL teacher. Teachers scaffold the academic language to ensure learning is comprehensible and is aligned with the New York State Common Core Learning Standards. Students are encouraged to use native language dictionaries during math, science and social studies units when academic language exceed the ELLs ability to comprehend text. Students of varying proficiency level may be partnered with newcomer ELLs who need assistance in comprehension. Students are also able to access online and computer app translation services to help add in comprehension. In terms of instructional approaches and methods, ENL teacher and classroom teacher will use the following to aid in comprehension of new content: 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Ps40 ensures that native language is appropriately evaluated by communicating with the parents or caregivers who speak both languages. When available we use classroom work from previous schools, where the home language was the mode of communication, to informally assess students literacy proficiency in their home language. Many in our school community speak the languages of our students. For example our librarian speak Hebrew. She works with the ENL teacher to determine the language proficiency of our Hebrew speaking students. Our ENL teacher and many parents from the community speak, read or write Japanese, Korean, or Spanish. We call upon these members to help informally assess proficiency through a variety of means, such as conversation, a reading of text in home language or writing in the home language. The ENL teacher also assesses students home language ability by pairing students who speak the same language during classroom activities. Teacher will observe students ability to communicate with each other in home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status In addition to the required ENL minutes of service per CR Part 154.2 provided by the ENL teacher, instruction will be differentiated for each of the following subgroups: a. The instructional plan for Students with Interrupted Formal Education will include academic and emotional support from our intervention Pupil Personnel Team and correlate with classroom instruction. The ENL and classroom teacher will collaborate with our SETSS teacher to focus on language and literacy at first. Then as progress is monitored, the instructional needs might shift to computation or a specific content area. In addition, a teacher assistant can be assigned to a SIFE child in order to help the student adjust to their new environment. b. The instructional plan for Newcomers, or ELLs who have been in US schools for less than three years, will include a peer tutor or partner during reading instruction. The teacher works with a small group who has similar academic needs and who may be from a similar culture. For example a boy from South America may work in the same small reading group as the girl whose grandmother is from Puerto Rico. PS 40 parent community and teachers are committed to helping all newcomer ELL students by providing language support during classroom time. ELLs will be assigned to volunteers under the program Parents and Friends As Reading Partners as an extra support. Each week volunteers will meet with student to partner read. 7  c. The instructional plan for Developing ELLs, those receiving service 4 to 6+ years, is to focus on the modality that is most challenging. The ENL and classroom teacher with collaborate with the Pupil Personnel Team to discuss intervention strategies to support student in reaching commanding level. ELLs who struggle with reading comprehension will receive support through one to one reading intervention with our reading specialist, and through the newly implemented Rescue Recovery Reading Program. d. The instructional plan for Long Term ELLS will also include consultation of the Pupil Personnel Team. Academic Intervention may determine that language is not the child’s struggle. Long-term ELLs may be evaluated for special learning needs and a discussion may take place for an Individualized Educational Plan (IEP). e. The instructional plan for Former ELLS, who score commanding/proficient in years one and two after testing proficient, will receive support from the ENL teacher in collaboration with the classroom teacher. At this time the ENL teacher uses the push-in model to help support the needs of a student. The classroom teacher and the ENL teacher address student's proficiency and identify academic challenges. Teachers closely monitor ELLs for academic support throughout the year. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies and grade-level materials teachers of ELL-Students with Disabilities (SWD) reflect the same Common Core Learning Standards with accommodations as needed for each individual ELL-SWD. The scaffolding strategies that ENL teacher and classroom teachers use to meet the needs ELL-SWD in language and ELA instruction are: • Modeling • Bridging • Schema Building • Contextualization • Text Re-presentation • Meta-cognition ELL-SWDs per individualized IEPs will work with either or both the SETTS and Speech and Language service providers using programs such as Wllson Fundations to target growth in specific language skills. The ENL teacher will also use the New Heights reading recovery program to assist ELL-SWDS in targeting growth in reading comprehension. The ENL teacher also will use a variety of online English language learning sites to help students in vocabulary recall, printing skills and reading comprehension. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our special education team work with the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher to ensure that all ELL-SWD achieve their IEP goals. Curricular is discussed and instructional plans are determined depending on the IEP goals. Scheduling is coordinated with the classroom teacher , ENL teacher, and the special education teachers to meet the needs of the ELL-SWDs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math and other content areas is designed by an intervention team such as our math specialist, our literacy and language intervention teacher, the ENL teacher, and classroom teacher. All current ELL students and former ELL students who take the ELA, math or content tests in the spring work with an intervention teacher for three to four periods a week during two cycles, one cycle begins in the fall and the next cycle begins in the winter. The students are placed in the area that they struggle in during the first cycle and then moved to a different area for the following cycle. In addition, students who scored below grade level on ELA, math or content in the spring are also working with one of 8  the teachers from our intervention team. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? PS 40 continues its Family Fridays. Our ELL families are encouraged to share traditional/cultural activities that will engage the entire class. This helps our ELLs feel proud of their culture while trying to assimilate to a new culture. We also encourage bi-lingual parents to share stories from across cultures. PS 40 continues its grandparents and special friends day. The plan on this special day is to invite our grandparent(s) or special friend to share an activity in their child's classroom that encourages cultural awareness and diversity. In terms of the ENL classroom, we will continue to build our bilingual library to include all the represented home languages at our school. We continue to look for technological instructional tools to help our students build language skills. We also continue to acknowledge and encourage mutual respect for all cultures through our "How To" and "Informational Writing" units in the ELL classroom. Students share and learn about each other's culture and country. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Since all of the programs offered at PS 40 have proven to show growth in both learning and socialization, we are not planning to discontinue any of our programs or services for ELLs at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs at PS 40. Parents of ELLs are given letters about our intervention services, our after school programs, our PTA community events. The Parent Coordinator, the ENL teacher and the School Counselor explain these programs to the family member of ELLs during the parent orientation and at conferences throughout the year. Parents of ELLs are encouraged to sign up for the Wingspan program at our school and join our PTA. The schools pairs families from the community who share a similar language or culture with newly arrived ELL families. These families are encouraged to share information and help answer any questions or concerns. The School Counselor also works one on one with families of 5th grade students during the middle school application process, a process which maybe overwhelming for newly arrived ELL families. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials, including technology, used at PS 40 include: 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language at PS 40 is supported is assessed and delivered through our ENL program by providing students with books in both English and in their home language, if available. For example, we provide copies of texts in Spanish and English for our bilingual Spanish ELLs. In content areas such as math, science and social studies we provide bilingual glossaries and text if available. In terms of assessment, we make available bilingual copies of formal assessments, such as the State Math and science tests. We use funds to hire translators for those students who speak a language for which a translated test is not available. Aside from formative assessment, we also provide translation when necessary from a student or a staff member who can communicate in the same language as our ELL. For example last year we had an ELL who was a Japanese speaker and new to PS 40. Knowing our student body helped us address her needs by introducing her to two of our bilingual Japanese students in the fifth grade. They helped her adjust and feel safe. In-house staff, parents, and students from our community help the ENL and classroom teachers facilitate and support native language. PS 40 has a committed staff who reach to our foreign language staff, students, and parents who help create a smoother transition for our ELLs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 9  The required services support and resources correspond to all ELLs’ ages and grade level. Ensuring that ELLs regardless of their English language proficiency level upon entry are placed in an age appropriate grade. During the push-out model, ENL groups are also made up of age-appropriate grade levels. Students in grades kindergarten through second grade often work together on the basis of their language level. Resources also correspond with the ELLs’ age and grade level. PS 40 orders age appropriate materials for ELLs who require it. Our SIFE student works with our SETSS teacher to help improve her literacy skills as well as with our math coach to help improve her math academic language. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We share our building with Salk Middle School. The principals of both school meet annually to coordinate the shared use of our gym, cafeteria, auditorium, hallways and outdoor space. School office staff and teachers are available during lunch and recess to help ELLs socio-emotional needs during this part of the day. We also collaborate with teachers from Salk and the neighboring Baruch middle school to share best practices and align curriculum. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We informally introduce newly enrolled ELLs and their families to current families who speak the same language in order to create a school buddy and a parent support system if the family with the same language expresses interest. The Parent Coordinator and ENL teacher make these introductions. ELLs are also invited during Teddy Bear day, occurring in June of the previous the school year, to engage in a meaningful play activity to acclimate themselves to their new school and meet new classmates. New parents also receive: • New Parent Welcome Folder- School-wide Information • School Handbook • Calendar from the DOE • PTA Calendar 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are no language electives at the school currently, but the after school program Wing Span offers a Spanish language elective and Ps 40 has Readers Theater after school for all students. ELLs are encouraged to apply so they can practice their language skills in an authentic and creative way. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 0  The ENL teacher is included in Teachers College and Common Core Learning Standards workshops for both K-2 and 3-5 grade in both ELA and Math content throughout the year. The ENL teacher also participates in professional development offered by Manhattan Field Support Center and the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support and turnkeys the information to all teachers of ELLs. In addition the ENL teacher participates in staff professional development focused on CCLS and Growth Mind Set Approach to learning. In order to support the staff overall the ENL teacher meets weekly with specific teachers of ELLs in order to analyze student work and plan next steps. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. PS 40 meets the professional development requirements as per CR-Part154.2 by providing more than 15% of professional development to all kindergarten through grade 5 teachers during the Monday professional development. There are three different topics of interest for professional development: math, science and ELA. Grades kindergarten through 5 work within a six-week interval on one of the three topics. In addition, the ENL teacher and classroom teachers, who have high of number of ELLs in their class, will attend outside professional development focused on ELLs. Professional development opportunity that focus on instructional strategies and curriculum design to develop ELLs’ language as well as content instruction for ELLs will be of interest. These sessions will satisfy the 50% requirement as per CR Part 154.2 for ENL teachers. The ENL teacher keeps a copy of the confirmation/attendance, agenda, and hand-outs of all professional developments sessions in the ELL documents binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to mandated parent orientation meeting and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences, PS 40 conducts individual meetings with parents of ELLs during our Tuesday parent engagement time. The classroom teacher and the ENL teacher schedule meetings with the parent(s) of the ELL in order to discuss goals, language development, and progress as well as next steps. The classroom teacher and the ENL teacher discuss the agenda prior to the meeting. If an interpreter or translation is needed, the translation and interpretation unit is contacted and arrangements are made. In house translation is used for Spanish, French, and Hebrew speaking parents. If parents are unable to come in, we will do over the phone conferences. If a translator is needed, we can access the translation and interpretation unit. We also help our 5th grade parents in the transition from elementary to middle school. In order to transition from elementary to middle school, our school counselor schedules an informational meeting to facilitate the middle school choice process and answer questions. The counselor helps ELL parents make a decision on a middle school that they feel is the best fit based on the ELLs needs. The ELL and classroom teachers are consulted in the an effort to collaborate and make a choice that best suits the ELL student’s language needs. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The guidance counselor at PS 40, provides the parents with a series of parenting workshops that help foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Literacy and homework help workshops administered by the classroom teachers also foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Throughout the school year, we invite parents for Family Fridays. This is a time for families to share about their culture and learn about new cultures. We also invite parents to our Publishing Parties, which are celebrations of student work organized at the end of every unit of study. This is another way to foster parental involvement in all classrooms, but it is especially important for ELL parents. It provides them with an opportunity to witness the academic learning and growth of their child in person. ELLs will often present their piece of writing in both home language and English, 1  which makes this opportunity particularly inclusive for parents and educational for the whole community. In the second half of the year, we invite parents for a series of parent engagement workshops, as well as several test preparation workshops. At the end of the year ELL Parents meet with specialty teachers as well as classroom teachers to discuss the upcoming year, as well as activities to grow over the summer. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. ELL parents are encouraged to attend the following events: The buddy family system also strengthens attendance of ELL families at these events. 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Susan Felder, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 40 School DBN: 02M040 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Susan Felder Title Principal Stephanie Lukas Assistant Principal Juliette Knight Parent Coordinator Sara Shafaee ENL/Bilingual Teacher Tricia Ryan and Dara Cohen Parent Will Owen/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Graham White/Science Teacher/Subject Area Erika Salzman/Math Coach Samantha Olshever/SETSS Coach Lisa Manger School Counselor Bonnie Laboy Maria Broughton Louise Smith Laura Niam/School Psychologist Yelena Katz/Speech Therapist Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/04/18 09/04/18 09/04/18 09/04/18 09/04/18 09/04/18 09/04/18 09/04/18 09/04/18 09/04/18 09/04/18 09/04/18 09/04/18 09/04/18 09/04/18 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M040 School Name: PS 40 Superintendent: Bonnie Laboy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Sara Shafaee ENL teacher No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data and methodologies used to assess our school’s written translation and oral interpretation needs begin at the time of registration when the parent meets our parent coordinator, Juliette Knight. The parent is then introduced to either the Principal, Assistant Principal or the ESL teacher who conducts the formal interview for the HLIS (Home Language Indentification Survey). The questions answered on Part III of the HLIS ensure that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information. Another method used is during the parent orientation, where parents of ELLs have an opportunity to share their preferred language for class newsletters, school notices and parent/teacher correspondence. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 5  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Arabic Bengali Chinese - Any Cantonese French Italian Japanese Korean Portuguese Spanish Turkish Russian Serbian 1096 3 2 12 0` 2 2 1 2 1 6 1 0 1 97 .27 .18 1.06 0 .18 .18 .09 .18 .09 .53 .09 0 .09 1096 3 0 12 1 1 2 1 2 1 6 1 1 1 97 .27 0 1.06 0.09 .09 .18 .09 .18 .09 .53 .09 .09 .09 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you Newsletters Ongoing plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All documents are translated as needed by 6  Letters from administration September to June teachers on a per session basis. Translated documents are provided by the DOE. Those that are not provided will be translated as need by teachers on a per session basis. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Curriculum Night 1 x/year Parent/Teacher conference 2x/year Individual Annual Conference with ENL instruction 1x/year Parent Workshops About 5x/year provide interpretation service(s)? Staff member or per session translator Staff member, per session translator, or over the phone DOE interpretation service. Staff member, per session translator, or over the phone DOE interpretation service. Staff member or per session translator 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The majority of families speak English, but in the case where an emergency contact English speaker can not be reached, we will call upon staff, another parent, or use the over the phone DOE interpretation service to reach families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 7  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The ENL teacher and administration will ensure all staff members are aware of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 at the staff meeting at the beginning of the school year. All teachers will be reminded of the over-the-phone DOE interpretation service and ability to hire translators for low-incidence languages for Parent-Teacher conferences, emergency situations, parent information sessions, IEP meetings, and all school community events. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school fulfills parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services, as per section VII of Chancellor’s Regulation A-633 by providing the following notifications: • Displaying a Welcome Poster at both arrival areas • Language ID Guides at the security desk and the main office • Parents’ Bill of Rights is available as per HLIS language of preference Part 3 • Parents’ Guide to Language Access Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The mechanisms that our school used to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availablilty of services include: • Formal interview at time of registration and the Home Language Identification Survey • Parent Orientation for Parents of ELLs • Parent Survey 8 
