 03M054 School Name: J.H.S. 054 BOOKER T. WASHINGTON Principal: ELANA ELSTER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Booker T. Washington MS54 03m054 310300010054 6-8 School Number (DBN): 103 West 107 Street, New York, NY 10025 212-678-2861 Phone Number: 212-316-0883 Fax: Elana Elster eelster@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Elana Elster Jose Beauvais Jerome Kramer Brianna DeSantisand StefanieGoldblatt NA NA NA District Information Geographical District: 03 Ilene Altschul Superintendent: 154 West 93 Street, New York, NY 10025 Superintendent’s Office Address: ialtschul@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-678-5857 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: 212-222-7816 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7 th Avenue, NY, NY 10011 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646.470.0721 Phone Number: 917.339.1765 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Elana Elster Jose Beauvais Jerome Kramer Barbara Denham Elizabeth McNulty *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Daniel Fagen Richard Cappadona SaraLichtman Brianna DeSantis Allison Gardy Patricia Saydah Stefanie Goldblatt Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? It is Booker T. Washington Middle School's mission to nurture our students as they enter adolescents, to support them as they learn the reasoning, writing and reading skills they need to excel as students. We focus on ensuring that our students develop strong study skills, the ability to advocate for themselves and to seek out the support they need to excel as students. It is our belief that these foundational skills are the most critical they can develop during their middle school years and those which will ensure their success as they move on to high school.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Booker T. Washington Middle School is a sixth through eighth grade middle school located on the Upper West Side of Manhattan. The school provides academic opportunities for students with diverse needs. Booker T. Washington prides itself in nurturing the adolescent and providing for his/her intellectual and social growth. A cadre of dedicated educators are committed to ensuring that the students gain the tools they need to succeed. Students have opportunities to get additional support both before school and after school. In addition, a wide range of extra-curricular activities enhance the school program. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Honors classes challenge students who are performing above grade level. There are also classes on every grade for students on grade level, as well as students who need a 12:1:1 special education classroom. There are Integrated Co-Teaching classes (ICT) on every grade level. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2018-2019 school year, our instructional focus will be on differentiation. Within each classroom, we aim to challenge and support all students -- from those who are academically advance to those who require academic remediation. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M054 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 852 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 44 45 16 26 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 10 19 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 24.0% % Attendance Rate 22.7% % Reduced Lunch 1.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 14.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 57.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.59 0% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 91.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 44 42 5 96.5% 1.2% 11.5% 8.6% 11.0% 8.0% 2 35% 4.9 86.4% 72% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES YES N/A YES YES YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Overall, students with disabilities scored significantly lower on the New York State ELA and math tests than the students without disabilities.  Overall, students with disabilities in the ICT classes do not perform as well as their classmates on in-class assessments. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in 12:1:1 classes will improve their reading skills as evident by an overall 2% increase on the New York State ELA exam. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will administer the Pearson Reading Assessment in order to establish a baseline level. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students September-Humanities teachers Teachers of SWD will collaboratively develop lessons during their professional development time with general education teachers. All teachers Teachers will participate in professional development workshops designed to improve reading skills. All teachers Parent Engagement Workshops will hold workshops on reading strategies and ways to support readers. Parents The school's independent reading program will closely monitor students' daily reading progress. Students October September 2018-June 2019 September 2018–June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-2019 Each teacher participate in their team planning. teachers Parent coordinator Administration to coordinate with speakers and Teacher Leader 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent coordinator and administration will lead parent workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Some professional development time will be devoted to planning intervention for the students. Teacher participation in MFSC professional learning opportunities. Peer visitations will be encouraged and facilitated by the administration. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 3  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least half of the students will show 2% growth on the Pearson Reading Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The Pearson reading assessment will be used. Data tracking tools. Reading records Student work. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child?  The school can seem very large to new students.   The Wellness Committee has raised concern about the social and emotional support students receive on a Some students feel a great deal of pressure to excel and to maintain high attendance rates. regular basis. They have suggested considering a mini-advisory program, stress reduction programs and additional personnel focused on emotional support for students. In addition, they would also like to see an expansion of the buddy program which began last year.  The increase in the number of students with special needs necessitates additional guidance services as well.  Data from a pilot buddy program in 2017-2018 indicated that students wanted more regular opportunities to interact with their buddies.  Based on the survey results in June 2018, there was a 55% satisfaction rate with the program. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a school created survey will show that 65% of the students surveyed said that the buddy program supported them in their transition to middle school. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monthly activities will be planned to provide students with opportunities to engage with their buddies. Parent support of this goal will be sought during orientation sessions, parent engagement sessions and through parent-teacher contact. A group of student leaders will also participate in planning programs. An informal check in, by homeroom teachers, with their students, will be conducted four times a year. Buddy program will also incorporate a academic tutoring/mentoring component. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All sixth graders and volunteer 8th grade buddies Parents September 2018 -June 2019 Administration and teachers and the participating after-school partnerships September 2018 -June 2019 Teachers and Parent Coordinator All Students September 2018 -June 2019 Teacher leader Sixth grade homeroom teachers Students September 2018 -June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Teacher Leader How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent orientation workshops will be held by the parent coordinator and administration. Information will also go out in weekly newsletters. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrators, guidance counselors, teachers and parent coordinator will work with students to help facilitate the development of the program. The PTA may be asked to help fund activities associated with this initiative. A teacher will be given professional time to lead the program. 6  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, using a school survey questionnaire, data will show a 60% rate of student satisfaction with the buddy program. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A calendar of events will be kept. A school survey questionnaire will also be utilized. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Teachers took advantage of professional learning opportunities available through the Manhattan Field Support Center, the Department of Education and universities during the 2017-2018 school year. Teachers reported that these were beneficial and provided them with resources and strategies to integrate into their classrooms. Some teacher teams want more time to meet by subject area and grade to plan together.   Curriculum maps and materials need continuous revision to address our changing student population.  Teachers continue to express their desire for more high quality professional development (The Framework for Great Schools.) The Professional Learning Committee will continue to try to design professional learning activities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, every teacher team will prepare one common assessment each quarter as documented through the team's Google documents resulting in a 5% increase on the collaborative teacher section of the School Quality Survey. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Weekly planning time will be built into teacher schedules and will allow teacher teams to collaborate and develop the assessments. Teacher teams Teachers of students with disabilities will take the lead in differentiating assessments. Special Education teachers and ESL teacher A parent orientation session will review study skills with parents in order to help them support their children. Parents The guidance counselors, school psychologist, social worker and other providers will participate in professional development aimed at addressing student needs in the classroom. Teachers will analyze student results and make curriculum modifications. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Guidance Counselors, psychologist, social worker and IEP teacher Teachers Teachers Teachers Teachers Administration September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018– June 2019 November 2018- June 2019 Teachers and Administrators How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be held by the parent coordinator and administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional learning opportunities through the DOE will be made available to teachers. Professional learning time on Monday afternoons, from 3:00PM-4:15PM. 9  Planning time for teachers during the school day once a week and before the school day once a week. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a review of teacher team minutes (Googledoc) and artifacts will show that teachers have developed two common assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A review of student portfolios and the data results will show that common assessments were administered. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Given the growing diversity of the student body, teachers are in need of more feedback and professional learning on differentiation. Based on a review of Danielson reports, component 1e was an area for improvement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administrative and teacher leaders will collaborate to develop techniques for differentiating instruction and assignments to ensure that ICT students' needs are met as measured by a .15 increase in Danielson Component 1e. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A Professional Development Committee will be formed. The committee will be made up of teachers who teach a cross section of subject areas and the administration. This committee will help plan professional learning that addresses this goal. The committee will meet monthly. Teachers June 28, 2018- June 2019 Principal and UFT Chapter Chair A schedule of professional learning sessions will be developed collaboratively by the administration and the committee. Teachers and Administration Teachers will be given time for planning lessons. Teachers Resources and experts from the DOE and Manhattan Field Support Center will be used for Professional Learning workshops and guidance. Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018 and January 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Committee and Administration Committee and Administration Committee and Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be held by the parent coordinator and administration. Information will also go out in weekly newsletters. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The PTA will cover the cost of all professional learning outside of the Department of Education. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2018, Advance Data for the school will show at least a 4% overall increase in component 1e. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance data will be used to measure progress in this area. Lesson plans will be reviewed. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Family involvement and input is valued by the school. There is an expectation that a strong and open line of communication will exist between the school and the families. This partnership between home and school supports our students and helps to ensure their success. The parents of the lowest performing students need support in helping students complete their homework and get the academic support the students need. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 30% of the sixth graders with disabilities will participate in the after-school academic support program in order to help them improve their skills and complete their work. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parents of students with disabilities will attend an informational meeting about the program. Parents of students with disabilities will be invited to come meet their child's pod leader. At the end of each marking period, the student coordinator, guidance counselor, parents, student and pod leader will review each student's academic progress. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents of students with disabilities parents of students with disabilities Students Parent Coordinator September 2018-November 2018 November 2018 Parent Coordinator and school staff November 2018, parents, guidance counselor, student coordinator, pod January 2018, leader Tutors (community volunteers) will be recruited to provide the after school academic support for students. A teacher will serve as the liaison between the school and the tutors. Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement April 2019, June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Tutors and Teacher Liaison If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parent workshops will be held by the parent coordinator and administration. Information will also go out in weekly newsletters. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrators – including assistant principal and student coordinator Scheduling resources – including school bookings, an electronic grading system 5  Communication systems – such as website, listserve and automated phone system Financial resources of the PTA – in order to provide for speakers, refreshments Human resources of the parent body – in order to volunteer their time and expertise Secretarial support and resources to assist Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 31, 2019, attendance records will document that at least 25% of sixth graders with IEPs are attending the after-school academic support program at least twice a week. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Logs of attendance and sign in sheets from meetings and events will be used to track progress. Students' grades and work portfolios will be reviewed. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State Assessments and Classroom Performance and Assessments Mathematics Science State Assessmentsand Classroom Performance and Assessments Classroom Performance and Assessments Wilson, Great Leaps, Basic Writing, Rewards, Options Small group instruction. Prentice Hall Intervention Kit Small group instruction. Direct Instruction One-to-One Early Academy (before school) After school homework help is available for all students in order to support their academic achievement. Early Academy (before school) After school homework help is available for all students in order to support their academic achievement. Early Academy (before school) After school homework help is available for all students in order to support their academic achievement. Early Academy (before school) Social Studies Classroom Performance and Assessments Direct Instruction One-to-One 7  After school homework help is available for all students in order to support their academic achievement. During the school day. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Referrals from Teachers, Dean and Administrators Counseling services by Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker or Health Clinic Individual intervention by the school psychologist, individual and group sessions by the social worker and guidance counselors. 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 12 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. After school academic support through the after-school program Supplies and materials as needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 12 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  These students will get additional academic support through the after-school program. This includes homework help, tutoring and enrichment activities. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 12 students - $9942 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. NA 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). NA Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 1  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. NA 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Booker T. Washington , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Booker T. Washington will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 4  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 5  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Booker T. Washington, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 6  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA)) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 7  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 8  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 03 School Name Booker T. Washington MS 54 Borough Manhattan School Number 54 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Elana Elster Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher William Spadaro-Burn Teacher/Subject Area Timothy McGonagle, Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area Elizabeth Hoffman, Special Ed Related-Service Provider Marisol Rosario Superintendent Ilene Altschul Assistant Principal Laura Lynch Geraghty Coach type here School Counselor Darlene Collet Parent Diane Brush Parent Coordinator Anne Pejovich McIntosh Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Broughton Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 0  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 850 Total number of ELLs 14 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.65% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The NYSESLAT results indicate that out students are strong in making the necessary progress in syllables and identifying initial and final consonants, as well as vowel recognition and blends. The students continue to have difficulties in connecting sounds to produce proficiency in spelling. In addition, the students have most difficulty with reading comprehension and writing expression. In the native language assessments, most of the students are performing on level. Those students that are performing below grade level are current new arrivals (entering ELLs). Based on the students’ scores, the school leadership and teachers are aware of the students’ strengths and weaknesses. With the data, the ESL teacher has created lesson plans in Reading, Writing, Listening, and Speaking, so instruction can be targeted to areas of need. The lessons are differentiated with various activities for students to complete at their level. In addition, the 1  school leadership has used these assessments to decrease the ESL teacher student ratio, determined priority topics for professional development and curriculum choices. Students that are at a Transitioning or Emerging level in reading and writing, are often at the same level in listening and speaking. Their learning in the different modalities appears to progress at the same pace. With long-term ELLs in the higher grades, the gap between proficiency in reading/writing and listening/speaking is wider. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In order to evaluate our program, we focus on the students’ performance on the NYSESLAT, the State Exams and on their Classroom Performance (report cards). 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data reveals that across grade levels, most of our ELLs are advanced in listening and their lowest overall modality is in writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Booker T. Washington offers the following ENL programs: • Stand-alone ENL instruction aimed at developing English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. This is taught by a certified ENL teacher. The groups are formed by students with the same level. • Integrated ENL is instruction is delivered by the a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher. Both methods of integrated ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. These groups are formed by grade level and class assignments. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA 2  c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Beginner, Entering, Low Intermediate and Emerging receive a total of 360 minutes. Beginner and Entering students receive 180 minutes in standalone ENL and 180 minutes in integrated ENL/ELA. Low Intermediate and Emerging students receive 90 minutes in standalone and 180 minutes in integrated ENL/ELA. The remaining 90 minutes can be in either standalone or integrated. Students who are intermediate or transitioning will receive a total of 180 minutes, with 90 minutes being integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes being flexible. Advanced students receive 180 minutes integrated ENL/ELAor other content areas. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Since our goal is to make the students reach proficiency in English, we make sure that we provide appropriate materials to support our ELL population. Our ELL students are supported by using: Leveled libraries in Spanish, English and Korean; Balanced Literacy Books; listening centers; and online resources for language acquisition like Duolingo and additional research tools. The teachers also use balanced literacy writing program where they plan for academic language, use stages of language acquisition, scaffolding strategies, and integrate content and language goals in planning for instruction. If the child is Entering or Emerging, he/she is serviced in a smaller group where more individualized attention is given to meet his or her academic needs. For newly arrived students, teachers also invest a significant amount of time introducing the student to the new culture, school, customs, and basic conversational skills. We have specific materials that will support the students’ academic needs. Many of our long-term ELLs also qualify for AIS and are students with special needs. The ESL and AIS teacher will examine their test history and communicate with the classroom teachers to identify the specific needs of the child, which is often mastering the academic language. In addition, developing mastery of the academic language promotes improvement in critical thinking skills, reading comprehension and writing skills. A large proportion of our long-term ELLs are deficient in the writing modality indicated with their ELA Test Scores and NYSESLAT results. We use an ESL curriculum focused on the Continental’s New York ELLs workbook for writing prompts and vocabulary building. These are used to support the writing in all content areas providing a foundational level of vocabulary acquisition. The ESL teacher also works with the long-term ELLs to support them in the Balanced Literacy Reading and Writing program. While ESL teachers support both the Balanced Literacy block and Continental approaches, they also integrate dictionary skill-building, conventions of writing through real-life experiences, group and independent research, online language applications used both independently and within the group to highlight multiple higher-order thinking activities. Since our goal is to make students reach proficiency in English, we make sure that we provide appropriate materials to support the ELL population. Newly admitted students are serviced in a smaller group where more individualized attention is given to meet his or her academic needs. For newly arrived students, teachers also invest a significant amount of time introducing students to the new school, culture, customs and basic conversational skills. Students are mentored by one of their peers who will help them with daily routines and fulfill the schools’ expectations. We have specific materials that will support the students’ academic needs. Teachers use sight words, picture dictionaries, low readability high-interest books, and age appropriate materials that support the curriculum. Students who have passed the NYSESLAT receive AIS or small group instruction during our morning academy for up to two additional years, or longer, if needed. The ESL teachers and the classroom teachers’ work together to provide a model that is best for the students. The school 3  provides an ESL schedule ensuring they receive the amount of time they are entitled to for ESL services. They are provided with the appropriate amount of instructional time based on their proficiency level indicated on the NYSESLAT test. Teachers deliver explicit ESL instruction by planning for both content and language objectives. Teachers also use scaffolding techniques, bring in realia, and reach out to different learning styles and modalities. Each ESL lesson entails a reading, writing, listening, and speaking component. Teachers plan their lessons based on the ESL and ELA standards; using chants, songs, student decided topics within common core alignment, real-life experiences, researching, listening to various speakers, and learning on the Internet using research tools and language acquisition applications, etc. Teachers use explicit ESL methodologies in their instruction, meeting the ESL standards. Teachers choose multi-cultural texts, fiction, nonfiction, newspapers, and poetry to enhance the students’ understanding of the language. Additionally, teachers supplement instruction with technology in their classrooms and in the library, as well as native language dictionaries and native language leveled libraries in their classrooms. A multi-faceted model with read-aloud, comprehension, vocabulary, fluency, writing, assessment pieces, listening and speaking, research and information skills is used with all ESL learners. In addition, the ESL teachers use bilingual dictionaries to increase English vocabulary with the newcomers during the class period. In general, Entering and Emerging students show overall strength in listening and speaking English. They can quickly recognize a number of common individual words and learned phrases, in a predictable context and on everyday personal topics. They understand greetings, simple instructions and depend on gestures and other context clues. Additionally, they can understand very basic vocabulary and can understand more complex content with scaffolding and the assistance of visual evidence. Students functioning at this level require extensive assistance to make language comprehensible. Vocabulary is very limited and they have great difficulty producing correct grammar, syntax, or structure. They often use gestures to express meaning or switch to their first language. Additionally, they prefer expressing their responses in simple written form, usually one word, rather than risk the embarrassment of verbal mispronunciations or improper word choice. The ESL teacher utilizes pictures, gestures, peer interaction, and the Whole Language approach to reinforce concept and increase vocabulary. Phonics and basic skills are also taught through the content area and with the assistance of multiple modalities. At the Transitioning level, students are more comfortable using English. They recognize most topics by familiar terms and phrases and are able to understand the main idea of a moderately demanding oral presentation. They understand a range of common vocabulary and idioms. They can also follow simple and short conversations. At the transitioning level, students start to use a range of grammatical structures. Grammar and pronunciation mistakes are frequent and the students tend to over-generalize grammatical structures. They continuously improve their oral language and communicate comfortably and spontaneously in many situations. They use a variety of vocabulary and are able to incorporate unfamiliar words rather quickly. Their discourse if fluent and they verbally master grammatical structures. They can be understood by listeners and in case of misunderstanding, are able to rephrase their sentence. At the Expanding level, students demonstrate fluency in listening and speaking. They make presentations; can switch from basic interpersonal conversational skills to cognitive language proficiency. They use sophisticated vocabulary and can use greater language resources to analyze and solve problems to make decisions. They also begin to proficiently use English idioms and everyday phrases. Additionally, they are proficient in using transitional words and phrases within their writing to link multiple ideas and express critical thinking skills effectively. Based on our school’s NYSESLAT scores and additional informal assessments, we have determined that reading and writing presents various challenges for Entering and Emerging ELLs. Their ability is limited to decode and sounding out words. They have few or no practical writing skill in English. These ELLs with high reading and writing skills in their first language are more comfortable transferring those skills to writing in English. They, however, will often spell the words phonetically causing foundationally spelling rules to be overlooked and elementary words to be misspelled. Working with them systematically on spelling and grammar allows them to adapt to the correct spelling very quickly. As the students improve and move to the Transitioning level, they understand the purpose, main idea, and details of some 4  shorter academic texts. They read word-to-word and understand most words and phrases. They are also able to scan shorter academic texts for specific information and research. They read texts with language that is concrete and factual, with some abstract and technical vocabulary concepts with a focus on nonfictional texts. They are able to effectively convey an idea, opinion, feeling or expression in a single paragraph, though their writing often shows a lack of control over grammar, vocabulary, spelling, and other basic conventions. As these Transitioning students move into the Expanding level, they adjust their reading rate according to the text. They grasp main ideas, key words and important details in a wide range of social and academic texts. They are able to understand most unfamiliar vocabulary by using context clues, understand the author’s purpose, point of view and understanding figurative language. They construct coherent paragraphs on familiar topics, expressing their feelings, opinions and research results with clear main idea and supporting details. They write about a variety of topics. Although they make errors in grammar, spelling, vocabulary, or punctuation, they can clearly communicate the purpose of their writing with general control over their conventions. For the ESL program, the school uses the small group instructional model to service the students in all grades. Each teacher plans for both language and content in lesson planning. The ESL teacher and the classroom teacher both meet with guided reading groups or confer individually. Guided reading groups and conferring allows for more specialized instruction. All teachers utilize the Reader’s Workshop for the Transitioning and Emerging students. Teachers must plan specifically for language within the structure of the Balanced Literacy mini-lesson to provide for language support for ELLs. Each lesson is planned to provide an opportunity for Listening, Speaking, Reading, and Writing in English. They reinforce listening/speaking skills, reading skills and writing via the student working with individual books as well as authentic literature that provides a balance of fiction and non-fiction, novels and short stories. They also include an audio CD with the recorded stories to build listening and auditory skills for our Entering and Emerging students with a first language other than English and/or Spanish. During the pull-out ESL sessions, Entering and Emerging students will interact with online resources to build their research skills and applications to assist in new language acquisition. The school has also analyzed the NYSESLAT scores by looking at the scale scores in both Reading/Writing and Listening/Speaking. By having a clear visual of the strengths and weaknesses in the modalities, they can plan for further differentiated instruction providing additional scaffolding and skill building sessions in the modality needing the most attention. For example, many of the Transitioning ESL students have a stronger Listening/Speaking skill set than Reading/Writing. Therefore, the teacher has planned for more instruction and practice on conventions and mechanics, as well as vocabulary development, to ensure the students’ reading and writing skills will improve. In addition to the Pearson/Longman Shining Stars Series and Continental’s New York ELLs Series, the students use the same curricular materials as the non-ELL students. The curriculum aligns with the Common Core State Standards. Yet, the teacher provides the students with additional support with scaffolding to ensure they have access to the material. They also use the Wilson resources, Great Leaps, basic Writing and Rewards as part of their program. Lastly, they will utilize Duolingo, an application that will allow the students to further their language acquisition while away from school with the use of a login and Internet access. In addition to supporting language acquisition, the application will provide data on vocabulary and grammatical structure mastery for the ESL teacher to analyze and improve on the lessons catering to the specific needs for the pull-out instruction sessions. Every student is evaluated on an individual basis to determine what class structure will best serve their educational needs. For students with disabilities, their IEP is followed and the IST is consulted to determine how to best support them. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs will be assessed in their home language in January and May. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 5  SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction will be differentiated for students of all levels. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Once we had a comprehensive diagnostic, we began to provide Academic Intervention Services (AIS) and English as a Second Language (ESL). The school’s intervention team along with their teachers, determines an individualized plan to meet their needs. The students are placed in the ESL class, but are given an age-appropriate class for social studies, science, and math. Thus, they are given instruction appropriate to the state testing; especially for 8th grade students. This also allowed the students to get the age-appropriate developmental and social skills that are needed to be addressed. The parents, along with the support of the AIS team and ESL teachers, provide support for the student. The AIS and ESL services are comprised of only small groups working to support the students’ needs. The student’s progress is tracked and monitored on a quarterly basis to ensure that the services are meeting their needs. Teachers use sight words, picture dictionaries, low readability high-interest books, and age appropriate materials that support the curriculum. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All the ELL students receive targeted intervention during Early Academy Program – on Tuesday and Thursday mornings. Additionally, intervention services, in English, are provided during ELA, math and social studies. WHere possible, students are placed in mainstream classes. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All the ELL students receive targeted intervention during Early Academy Program – on Tuesday and Thursday mornings. Additionally, intervention services, in English, are provided during ELA, math and social studies. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Students will be encouraged to come for homework help in the afternoon. There they can get support with their classwork after school. The library will also be open to them to use the computers or to get books before school two mornings a week. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All programs available at Booker T. Washington are available to all of the students. These include enrichment programs, after school programs, special events, assemblies and trips. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 6  Instructional materials used to support the ELLs include all curricular resources, Ipads, computers and library books. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The ENL teacher works with the students to help them connect strategies applicable in both languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The students are all grouped by grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials used to support the ELLs include all curricular resources, Ipads, computers and library books. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The school holds an orientations session for all new students. For sixth grade, this is fairly extensive. In addition, every new student is given a buddy to help them adjust to the school. Homeroom teachers also ensure that the student is transitioning well. The parent coordinator reaches out to the family and provides them with support. There is also a parent orientation program as well. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Students can take Spanish, Latin, French or Mandarin Chinese 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development to all tachers of ELLs will be provided by the ESL teacher. This will focus on specific reading and writing strategies to use with the ELLs. In addition, all teacher will participate in schoolwide professional learning activities which focus on pedagogical strategies. Teachers will also attend borough-wide and citywide workshops. Professional Development will take place on the first and third Wednesday of each month. All teachers, including the ENL teachers and the teachers of ELLS will participate in learning opportunities which focus on the CCLS and designing lessons which address them. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All members of the staff will participate in PD focused on working with the ELLs in our school. An orientation program is conducted each September to help the students transition to middle school. 7  Professional Development requirements will be met by utilizing the ENL teacher and the resources/programs available through the DOE and through the Borough Center. Agendas, materials and sign-in sheets will be maintained as documentation. Addressing the Common Core Learning Standards will be discussed in each session. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Meetings with parents will be scheduled twice a year to review their child's language program, the progress he/she has made and needs to make and to review and/or revise his/her goals. These meetings will take place in December and April. Translation and Interpretation will be provided by the DOE Office and by members of the staff. . 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Among the events that foster parental involvement are Class Breakfasts, Parent Orientation Sessions, Back-To-School Night, PTA Meetings (with translation available) and other parent-sponsored social events. The parent coordinator will reach out to parents and ensure that they have the translation and interpretations services that they need.. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NA 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Elana Elster, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Booker T. Washington School DBN: 03m054 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Elana Elster Title Principal Laura Lynch Geraghty Assistant Principal Anne McIntosh Parent Coordinator William Spadaro-Burn ENL/Bilingual Teacher Diane Brush Parent Stephanie Aronoff/Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area Marisol Rosario/Spec Ed Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Darlene Collet School Counselor Ilene Altschul Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 0  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 03m054 School Name: Booker T. Washington Superintendent: Ilene Altschul The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use data available in ATS and in the permanent record folders of incoming students to determine the primary language spoken by parents. Data is collected from sources such as Home Language Identification Survey, Blue Emergency Contact Cards,ATS Report of Preferred Languages, Parent Surveys, Teacher Survey 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 1 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The most predominate need is for translation into Spanish. We have sent out translated material in Spanish to all of our families. We have also let all parents know through written, translated material, that language support and translation is available in all languages. We have used the materials provided by the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. September: Welcome Packet includes letters, calendars and school policies. This will be sent for translation at the end of July. Periodically throughout the year: notices of upcoming events and information. Translation services will be requested four weeks before each event and/or the dissemination of materials. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent-Teacher Conferences, Back-To-School Night, Class Breakfasts, Concerts and Recitals. Academic Conferences. In addition to on the phone translation services, Darlene Collet, Martin Rosario, Susan Trout, Susan Samay, Donivan Barton are able to serve as translators. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school will adhere to these regulations. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will conduct a survey of parents to gather feedback. 3 
