 02M089 School Name: P.S. 89 Principal: VERONICA NAJJAR   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information THE LIBERTY SCHOOL 310200010089 PREK-5 School Number (DBN): 02M089 201 WARREN STREET, NEW YORK, NY 10282 212-571-5659 Phone Number: 212-571-0739 Fax: VERONICA NAJJAR VNAJJAR@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV School Contact Person: VERONICA NAJJAR Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: CATHERINE GALLANT MICHELE FRIESZ/BRUNITOPETE VERONICA NAJJAR N/A N/A NA District Information Geographical District: 2 Superintendent’s Office Address: BONNIE LABOY Superintendent: 333 SEVENTH AVENUE, NEW YORK, NY 10001 BLABOY@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3815 Phone Number: 212-356-3702 Fax: MANHATTAN Field Support Center (FSC) YUET CHU FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 SEVENTH AVENUE 8 th FLOOR, NEW YORK, NY 10001 YCHU@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) TRACY ACKERMAN CARMEN ROMERO Member/STAFF Member/STAFF  Name VERONICA NAJJAR FRANCESCA BATTISTA BRUNITOPETE N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable  Name KAREN BERMAN AMY VAN BUSKIRK DEIRDRE LITTLEWOOD EMILY HUNT ERIKA TOGNERI Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/STAFF Member/ Member/PARENT Member/PARENT Member/PARENT Member/PARENT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of PS 89 is to provide an engaging and nurturing school community dedicated to the development of independent thinkers and lifelong learners. PS 89 emphasizes creativity, exploration, understanding, and communication — especially through its innovative, comprehensive, and interdisciplinary social studies program. To ensure a broad exposure to a liberal arts-based curriculum, all PS 89 students participate in our music, art, dance, science, and physical education programs. The school library and instructional technology further enrich the learning at P.S. 89. Through high quality standards-based instruction, a nurturing environment, and the development of civic,   social, and technological skills necessary to function productively in the world at large, we create a community of active, curious learners. PS 89's core beliefs support our mission: Inquiry-based learning  developing a rigorous curricula that promotes critical thinking skills   differentiated instruction that provides access for all students  professional collaboration to reflect on and improve pedagogy  on-going assessment of student understanding that drives daily instruction  partnering with parents to engage in and support their children's education 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Founded in 1998, PS 89 is a District 2 elementary school located in northern Battery Park City, serving children from PreK-5th grade. The school has approximately 435 children from culturally diverse backgrounds. The school demographics are: 16% Asian, 2% black, 16% Hispanic, and 63% white. 4% of students receive ENL services, and 19% have IEPs with mandated services including ICT. Student attendance is 96%, and teacher attendance, 98%. PS 89 is an anchor of the community for our students and their families, supported by an active and passionate PTA. The school is in a well-kept, modern building, where pride in the students' accomplishments is evident in the prominently displayed student work. The teaching philosophy of P.S. 89 is reflected in its social studies-based approach. The social studies curriculum offers an ideal vehicle for developing independent learners and critical thinkers. Through an in-depth study of a single topic each semester, children learn how to formulate questions, seek information through authentic research, make real world connections, share their conclusions, and ultimately synthesize and utilize their knowledge. Teachers provide structured but open-ended projects and resources that will enable the students to guide their own inquiry and meet the NYS Common Core Learning Standards. Every student, including special education students and English language learners, are involved in two or three research projects throughout the year. Projects are developed in coordination with classroom teachers, special education teachers, cluster teachers, school librarian, and technology specialist. As a result of this integrated, interdisciplinary social studies approach, children gain a deep understanding of concepts and acquire the skills needed to become successful and productive members of society. PS 89 partners with Manhattan Youth, a CBO that provides an after-school program in the school, as well as a summer camp. PS 89 partners with Metamorphosis Teaching Learning Communities, which provides a math coach to work with the principal and teachers on all grade levels. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 19% of the school population are special needs students, who typically make up a large percentage of the students with the lowest NYS test scores. The majority of the student disabilities are cognitive, and special education teachers in conjunction with general education teachers work to provide scaffolds for student learning and access to the general curriculum. These scaffolds could include but are not limited to: graphic organizers, modified student sheets, modified tasks, and texts specific to student reading levels. PS 89 has an ICT classroom on each grade level, and a designated SETTS teacher who fulfills the mandated instruction for those children who require that support. Other service providers - speech, OT, PT, and counseling - work collaboratively to support students both through the IEPs and at risk services. 0  Families from around the world move to Battery Park City, due to its proximity to the Financial Center. 4% of our students receive English as a New Language services, and our ENL teacher works with the classroom teachers to provide relevant and appropriate instruction. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of the Framework for Great Schools in which PS 89 made the most progress was Rigorous Instruction. Developing our pedagogy and classroom practices has been a goal for PS 89 for the past few years, and student progress has been significant, measured by Mid-Year and End of Year assessments in both Reading and Math. Our Area of Focus for the upcoming year (2018-2019) will be concentrating on our social/emotional learning as part of Supportive Environment. After a terrorist attack outside the school building in October 2017, we brought in several groups to work with staff, parents, and students, including therapists from NYU's school of social work and an early childhood social worker who provided parent workshops. Because our school guidance counselor was only working part-time (due to a small number of students mandated on their IEPs for counseling), we did not have a consistent point person to bring in other groups to support our community. During our June 2018 PTA budget meeting, the principal requested that the PTA pay for part of the counselor's salary, which has been agreed upon. This will mean that we can develop relationships with Child-Mind Institute and Ackerman Institute to bring workshops to our community for students, staff, and parents.. Our goals for the 2018-2019 School Year are: 1) Rigorous Instruction - continuing to enrich the PS 89 math pedagogy through a partnership with Metamorphosis 2} Teacher Collaboration - looking at grade goals and developing quantitative action plans 3) Strong School Leadership - supporting professional development in math and literacy for teachers 4) Supportive Environment - providing developmentally appropriate and differentiated support and extensions for all students, both academically and social-emotionally 5} Strong Family Ties - supporting emotional needs of students and parents and developing new initiatives for the school. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M089 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 433 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 17 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 8 14 17 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 20.0% % Attendance Rate 19.4% % Reduced Lunch 4.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 14.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 58.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 20.09 3% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 87.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 100% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 51 53 95.9% 0.0% 13.6% 1.6% 17.3% 7.9% 2 3% 6 85.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 89 has a strong and engaging mathematics program that is aligned to the CCLS, and PS 89 students generally perform well on the NYS math test. Last year, 90% of students performed at Level 3 or 4, up almost 5% from the previous year. Our math coach from Metamorphosis will continue to work with our classroom teachers in grades K-5 in strengthening their instructional practices in the classroom. Metamorphosis uses a process called Content Coaching, a strategic, systemic approach to improving student learning, focused on the instructional core: planning, implementing, reflecting on, and refining lessons based on evidence of student learning or lack thereof. Content Coaching focuses on providing all students access to the material that is being studied. If students are to learn important and relevant content well, teachers need to focus their lessons on the big ideas, structures, and/or essential questions relevant to the discipline. Teachers need to deeply understand those ideas and structures themselves, before they can successfully make them accessible to students. Specifically, the 2nd and 3rd grade teams learned how to use math routines to build numeric and computational fluency outside the math curriculum. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. At this year's PTA budget meeting, the principal asked the parent leaders to increase the amount of money in the Professional Development budget line in order to provide more math instruction to teachers. Due to the school's efforts to educate parents on the work that has been done by the Metamorphosis math coach this year, parents value this program and readily agreed. As a result, twenty days of math staff development will be provided by Metamorphosis Content Coaching in the 2018-2019 school year. The coach will work with the teaching staff of all grades thjs year with each grade receiving nine hours of direct coaching and mentoring. This approach to teaching math will result in a deeper understanding of mathematical concepts for a wide range of students, measured by the administration of math assessments three times a year.. 3  4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration will arrange for Metamorphosis coaching for grades K-5, with each grade receiving nine hours of direct coaching and mentoring. Grades K-5 Teachers will work further on the strategies learned during the math coaching sessions in their grade team meetings by creating lessons plans, sample problems, and assessments. Teachers Grades K - 5 20 days Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Sept. 2018 through June 2019 The Metamorphosis coach will collaborate with teachers to develop a parent workshop on math, with presentations and breakout groups. Parents will learn more about the math curriculum at PS 89 and how math is taught. Parents Spring Administration, teachers, math coach Teachers Math coach, teachers, administration Student progress in beginning of year, mid-year, and end-of-year math assessments will be tracked in order to assess the effectiveness of this math professional development program. Students in grades K-5 Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Administration, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school offers a series of parent workshops called Learning Links, and in the past we have offered such topics as The Common Core Learning Standards, NYS Testing, and Metamorphosis Math. In the upcoming year, the administration will work with teachers and our math coach to present these workshops in a timely manner over the course of the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Prep coverages, weekly Monday PD sessions, consultants, PTA funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A 5  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, teachers in grades K-5 will have received math coaching and mentoring, and completed two of the student math assessments. A parent workshop has been scheduled for March, during which parents will learn more about the professional development that teachers have been receiving and how it impacts their students' learning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) School-created math assessments - three times a year.` Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? PS 89's mission is to offer differentiated instruction that provides access for all students, including special education students, ENL students, and those whose academic performance is either higher or lower than grade level. This is accomplished through high-quality classroom instruction. as well as a variety of opportunities for small group instruction, one-to-one instruction, and continual assessments in reading and math ( Fountas & Pinneal reading assessments three times a year, as well as school-created math assessments). PS 89 teachers provide Tier 1 interventions for students who are struggling with daily classroom work and homework. These interventions are developed in grade team meetings, and with the help of the special education teachers who use them regularly with their ICT/SETTS students. This year the teachers will focus on increasing their Tier 1 interventions before discussing their students with the Pupil Personnel Team (PPT). The goal is to create a more efficient system of supporting students. The school's Pupil Personnel Team (which consists of the principal, related service providers, and our IEP team) provides a weekly opportunity for teachers to discuss struggling students, who, despite modifications in classroom instruction, are still not making adequate progress. The team offers at-risk instructional support to students, after which the team re-assesses the student's progress and considers whether an evaluation or additional support is necessary. In last year's Quality Review, the school's area of focus was determined to be developing more quantitative goals and action plans, which will be one of our CEP goals this year. 7  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, teachers will participate in ten hours of grade level team meetings to develop and implement accommodations, modifications, and supplementary aids for their students, based on Beginning of Year (BoY) Fountas and Pinnell reading assessments; analysis of student work; and teacher observations. The focus will be on developing more quantitative goals and action plans. During parent/teacher conferences, teachers will keep parents abreast of their students' progress and the supports they are receiving. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PD to support teachers in designing curriculum with Universal Design for Learning (UDL) in mind, as well as research-based programs, such as Preventing Academic Failure (PAF) Students below grade level Throughout school year PD to support RtI (Response to Intervention) model - tiered instruction and intervention based on ongoing assessments so that student needs are met. Students below grade level Throughout school year Administration, teachers, AIS teacher, SETTS teacher Administration, teachers, AIS teacher, SETTS teacher Grade team work on developing extensions for above-grade level students. Parents will be informed of their students' progress at bi-annual parent/teacher conferences and other conferences, as needed, so that they understand whether their children are reaching grade level benchmarks and individual goals. Students above grade level All parents Throughout school year Teachers P/T con-ferences Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will meet with parents twice a year at parent/teacher conferences, and as needed, to communicate to parents their student's goals and the action plan to achieve those goals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monday PD sessions, grade team meetings, Election Day PD Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 9  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By mid-year teachers will have monitored student progress through two school-created math assessments and two F&P assessments. They will meet with parents to diiscuss student progress, quantifiable goals, and challenges. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School-created math assessments, F&P reading assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. All PS 89 teachers share a belief system grounded in the centrality of collaborative, project-based learning for all students, and they collaborate to support this belief system. The school actively gathers and analyzes a wide repertory of formative data to create a complete picture of all students' strengths and needs. Teams of teachers routinely meet to review and assess student work products, many of which are long-term projects that reflect the extensive units of study. These discussions anchor the development of assessments that give a complex portrait of students' needs in skills, content, and process, as evidenced by teacher team created rubrics. Structured team collaborations have resulted in opportunities for teachers to share progress of pedagogical practice and improvement in student progress. These collaborations allow teacher leaders to plan, design, and spearhead teacher-initiated professional development sessions. While all teachers are deeply involved in a variety of engaging professional collaborations, comprehensive systems to evaluate the impact of their work on student achievement are not yet fully evident. PS 89 will focus on improving systems for evaluating the effectiveness of teacher teams and structured professional collaboration. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teacher teams will collaborate a minimum of three times during professional development sessions to develop rigorous, appropriate, and quantifiable extensions and supports for reading. They will monitor the progress of students by tracking their beginning-of-year, mid-year, and end-of-year reading levels, and determine whether the extensions and supports resulted in greater student progress as evidenced by higher reading levels. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monthly grade level meetings, weekly professional development meetings, and at least three yearly Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessments of students' reading levels will serve to inform teachers' strategies for improvement. Professional development on analyzing the cognitive demands of tasks and considering supports and extensions for them. At least four times per year, there will be collaboration with AIS and ENL teachers to develop strategies to support struggling students and ELLs. At least four times per year, teachers will report to parents on students' reading progress through parent-teacher conferences and report cards. In addition, teachers will communicate with parents on a regular basis on what students are working on in the classrooms and host parents for monthly Family Friday programs in the classrooms. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Administration, grade level teams. All students and SWDs and ELLs Sept. 2018 through June 2019 All students Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Administration, grade level teams, AIS teachers, and ENL teacher. Teachers, parents, administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed of school CEP goals at a PTA meeting in the fall; parents on the SLT will communicate those goals as collaborative members. Parents will be informed of their students' progress at parent/teacher conferences in November and March, and report cards in January and June. Parents are encouraged to spend time in classrooms on once a month Family Fridays, and to attend parent workshops when offered. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Prep coverages, weekly Monday PD sessions, Family Fridays, consultants Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 2  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019 students will be assessed to determine where they fall on the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment reading level continuum. Curricular adjustments will be made by classroom teachers based upon the results of the January assessments to ensure that students reach (or exceed) their grade level goal by year end. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Individual, one-on-one reading conferences by classroom teachers using the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment reading level continuum. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. For the past year, the PS 89 principal has provided in-school math professional development to classroom teachers, arranging schedules so that the coach is able to work with grade teams for extended periods of time over the course of several months. The PTA supported this staff development, understanding that the continued growth of teacher pedagogy has a profound effect on student achievement. This year the principal, in coordination with her cabinet of staff members, determined that with the financial backing of the PTA, she would support another year of math professional development through an institute called Metamorphosis. Metamorphosis uses a strategic approach called Content Coaching to improve student learning, by focusing on the instructional core: planning, implementing, reflecting on, and refining lessons based on evidence of student learning or lack thereof. For students to learn important and relevant content well, teachers need to focus their lessons on the big ideas, structures, and/or essential questions relevant to the discipline. Teachers need to deeply understand those ideas and structures and learn to make them accessible to students. For the 2018-2019 school year, the Metamorphosis coach is working with grades K - 5. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. For the 2018-2019 school year, the principal has contracted with Metamorphosis and the same coach to continue her work with PS 89 teachers on their pedagogy, enriching and deepening their understanding and practice. The coach will work with grades K - 5. The teachers will track changes in students’ triannual math assessments, noting what has improved and what still needs improvement. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal will contract with Metamorphosis to provide 18-20 days of professional development for teachers in six grades. Grades K-5. Principal will arrange for substitute teachers in the classrooms whose teachers are working with the coach. Grades K-5 Through-out school year Through-out school year Principal Principal In coordination with the math coach, teachers will present a Math parent workshop to inform/educate parents on the PS 89 math curriculum in general and the work that is being done through Metamorphosis. Teachers will share their new math pedagogy strategies with other teachers during a PD session on the Chancellor's Conference Day All parents Fall Teachers, principal, math coach All teachers Spring Teachers, principal, math coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In the spring parents will be invited to a workshop presented by the Metamorphosis math coach and PS 89 teachers. They will be able to see examples of the work that the coach is doing with the teachers, and see sample lessons with teachers and students so that they can understand the impact of the math coaching and ways to support their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy for substitute teachers, PTA funding for math and literacy coach Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 5  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will look at Beginning of Year (BoY) math assessments, and compare with mid-year and End of Year (EoY) assessments to determine student progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. BoY math assessment, mid-year math assessment, EoY math assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At PS 89 we are fortunate to have a strong relationship with our families, who support the school in many ways. Parents work collaboratively on the Executive Board of the PTA and the School Leadership Team as school leaders. They spend countless hours on fundraisers, such as the Taste of Battery Park City, the Run for Knowledge, and the Spring Auction. Parents volunteer in the school on a daily basis, in the library, in classrooms, and in the lunchroom. They run book fairs during parent/teacher conference weeks, and donate books to the classrooms through the teacher wish lists. They engage in community building as well, with the annual Multicultural Potluck Dinner, which honors the many different cultures of the school community, and the Liberty Walk, during which parents, students, and staff come together to raise money for people in need. While in PS 89’s most recent Quality Review (2017), School Culture (3.4) received a rating of Well-Developed, we continue to reassess the needs and interests of our parent body to provide them with the support they need to be effective partners in their children's education. Over the years, PS 89 has developed in-school events to involve parents in their children’s education. Family Fridays, a monthly invitation to join the students and teachers in the classrooms for activities such as math games, social studies, or community building, is one of our most popular and well-attended school events. Another opportunity for parents to be in classrooms is volunteering with Learning Centers, when they work with a rotating group of students on a particular project related to classroom learning. Parents chaperone field trips, which provides another access point to curriculum. At least twice a year, parents are invited to attend classroom culminations, which celebrate the completion of social studies units. Students tour their parents through a check list of projects, books, group projects, and videos, all student-produced and demonstrating a deep understanding of the social studies topic. During the 2017-2018 school year, PS 89 parents and students were witnesses to a terror attack that took place outside our schoolyard. As a result of this event, which traumatized some of our students and parents, we brought in mental health professionals to support parents and students. We will be continuing these efforts by partnering with local parenting groups, such as the Child/Mind Institute and the Ackerman Institute. 7  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 the PS 89 staff will have offered parent workshops in math, and state testing, with the specific purpose of enhancing parent understanding of PS 89's CCLS-aligned curriculum. Parents will be better able to understand their children's progress in the bi-annual STARS report cards. Parents will offer feedback after these workshops by filling out surveys generated by the staff. In the aftermath of the events of October 31, 2017, the school has offered several programs to support both students and parents. These include presentations for staff and parents, as well as individual sessions, with staff from A Caring Hand, a group skilled in working with trauma, as well as art therapy for students run by graduate students from NYU's social work school. With the support of the PTA, the school is providing two parenting workshops by the art therapists, to support parents whose children are struggling, as well as three sessions of parenting workshops by a school social worker. For the school year 2018-2019 the PTA will be funding our school guidance counselor so that she can work full-time at PS 89. Since the DOE only funds her to meet the needs of the students mandated for counseling, she has worked only three days a week at PS 89. As we expand our social emotional learning programs to encompass RULER, as well as contract with the Child Mind Institute to support parents and students, it is imperative that we have a full-time counselor. The DOE Parent Survey, administered in spring 2019) will track parent satisfaction with school communication, rigorous instruction, and collaboration. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School guidance counselor will coordinate a series of parent workshops, focusing on social/emotional needs of families and students. All families Throughout the year Teachers and Principal will coordinate a series of parent workshops with an academic focus - math, state testing, 4th grade middle school admissions, etc. All school Throughout the year Guidance counselor, principal, parent coordinator Teachers, principal Parents will give feedback on the effectiveness of these programs, in regards to how they have gained understanding of the school curriculum. All families Through-out the year Administration, teachers, parent coordinator Survey results will be examined, and change will be made based on what we learn from the survey All families End of Year Administration, parent coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Manhattan Youth after school program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Prep coverages, weekly Monday PD sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 9  By spring 2019 the school will have offered three workshops to parents and received parent feedback in the form of surveys. Parent input will inform future workshops. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The results of the parent surveys will help assess the usefulness of the workshops and will inform future parent workshops. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Reading below grade level (determined by Fountasand PinellAssessment and/or 4th and 5th grade state test scores) Mathematics Working below grade level(determined by school-created mathassessment and/or 4th and 5th grade state test scores) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one-on-one During the school day and other professional work periods Small group, one-on-one During the school day Working with small groups of struggling learners, the AIS teacher implements a variety of reading and spelling programs and strategies such as Wilson ,Preventing Academic Failure, and Words Their Way . Teachers provide small group instruction during the school day to offer pre-teaching and targeted instruction based on the needs of the students. The school's SETSS teacher provides at-risk services to children struggling with math in small groups or one-to-one, either in the classroom or in a separate room. Instruction is based on the concepts and skills from the Common Core Standards and theInvestigations program. Students are provided with structured, 1  Science Working below grade level Social Studies Working below grade level At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Struggling with social-emotional issues systematic instruction with opportunities to practice concepts, share ideas and ask questions in a smaller group. Modified materials, graphic organizers and manipulative tools are used, if necessary. The Science teacher modifies curriculum and homework assignments in accordance with the needs of individual students. In addition, struggling students are supported by our AISand SETSSteachers. Working in small groups or one-on-one, theAISteacher implements a variety of reading and spelling programs and strategies such asWilson,Recipe for Reading, Preventing Academic Failure, andWords Their Way, as well as supporting writing and organizational skills. Teachers provide small group instruction during the school day to offer pre-teaching and targeted instruction based on the needs of the students. The school's guidance counselor works with children who have shown signs of social Small group During the school day Small group or one-on-one During the school day Individual and small group During the school day 2 School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) emotional distress that is affecting their classroom work and performance. The school's psychologist and social worker are always available to work with students, as needed. 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  If PS 89 registers any Students in Temporary Housing, we will support them using the Title 1 set-aside funds. This support may include providing school supplies for home use, such as pencils, pens, crayons, paper, notebooks, manipulatives, etc., depending on the age and needs of the students. The funding may also be used to pay for any school costs that arise, such as class trips, classroom supplies, school photos, etc. We will provide parent Metrocards so that families are able to come to the school and be involved in their children's learning. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 0 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 6  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 7  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 89, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S 89 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 9  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 0  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 89, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 1  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act; Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 3  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 4  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 2 School Name The Liberty School Borough Manhattan School Number 089 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Veronica Najjar Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Betsy Chairman Teacher/Subject Area Dahlia Bouhari/1st grade Teacher/Subject Area NA Related-Service Provider Min Lee/AIT Reading Superintendent Bonnie Laboy Assistant Principal Ria Seplowin Coach NA School Counselor Karen Berman Parent Carolyn Klotz Parent Coordinator Connie Schraft Field Support Center Staff Member Sileni Nazario Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program - 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 380 6 Total number of ELLs 16 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.21%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 3 0 0 5 0 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS 89 uses a variety of assessment tools, including the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System, the Developmental Reading Assessment (DRA), Marie Clay’s Concepts of Print, and Writing Prompts to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. These assessments measure a variety of literacy skills, including: concepts about print, letter identification, high frequency word recognition, spelling skills, decoding and comprehension skills. We use ongoing running records, on demand assessments for pre and post unit work, and conferencing, to help support and plan for student needs and to design and modify lessons or grouping based on needs presented. This also allows us to plan appropriately for small group intervention work both as part of Tier 1 and Tier 2 Intervention. We also regularly assess literacy in the ELL class. Because our groups are small and divided by grade, we are able to strongly support writing skills being taught by grade level. 7  We do a great deal of shared writing and editing, in addition to individualized pieces. We use rubrics while writing and during the editing process, so students understand and internalize what is expected of them and the teacher can modify instruction based on how students perform. The ELL teacher keeps consistent records of oral language development assessed through individual conferences and classroom observations. Noted are vocabulary, structure, and general comprehension development. She also meets with classroom teachers regularly, to discuss how social and academic language skills are progressing in the classroom. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers have assessment time scheduled (with substitutes hired when necessary), so we can accumulate and analyze assessment data. Throughout the year, teachers also trade classes and assess students other than their own to ensure validity of assessments and norming practices. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use the four modalities of the NYSESLAT to identify students’ baselines and areas of need. We also use their beginning of the year reading level assessed with running records for a baseline and continue assessing throughout the year to measure student progress and needs. Finally, in grade 3-5, we look at State ELA and Math results to determine areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data has been gathered, and repeatedly throughout the year as we accumulate new data, teachers group (and regroup) their students in order to best meet their needs. Classroom teachers make and adjust reading groups and partnerships that are homogeneous in regard to literacy level, while the ENL teacher works with classroom teachers to build heterogeneous groups and partnerships to support other language development. Class work and curriculum are also modified and differentiated to provide a variety of access points. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] In accordance with the RTI Model for ELL's Academic Success, students who are below grade level in literacy first receive Tier 1 supports in the classroom through modified texts, parallel teaching, and small group instruction. Those students who are not showing enough improvement with Tier 1 support, get intensive, targeted intervention through extra reading/writing support with academic intervention teachers in and out of the classroom setting, using sources such as PAF and Wilson. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We look at the four modalities of the NYSESLAT to determine which areas require focus for which students. All classes involve reading, writing, listening and speaking, but depending on our analyses of the NYSESLAT data, we organize class time to address higher need areas. Similarly, we look at ELA data to determine in which components of reading comprehension students need more support. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We use PD time for the ENL teacher to meet with classroom teachers to discuss data analysis and how to adjust individual and team teaching optimally, to best meet student needs. In addition, PD times are divided into inquiry team cycles where struggling students (ELLs and non-ELLs) are discussed and instruction is designed, modified, and implemented with their needs in mind. Our Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) meets on Wednesday afternoons. This team is also dedicated to sharing data, concerns and best practices to support students. 8  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students are generally blocked both according to grade and proficiency levels. When a beginner or intermediate newcomer starts school in the middle of the year, we vary her schedule so she is included in both a grade group and a proficiency level group. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We have a freestanding ENL program and we deliver instruction to meet proficiency level. Entering and Emerging receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week, with one unit as stand-alone and one unit of integrated ENL. Transitioning students receive .5 units of study in the stand-alone model, and .5 in integrated ENL. Expanding students receive one unit of integrated ENL, and Commanding (who are now officially former ENLs) receive two years of .5 units of integrated ENL. All integrated ENL is in Core Content Areas, and/or where appropriate, ELA studies. Our school uses a Balanced Literacy approach to learning, so students get consistent literacy input, helping them with Language Arts in English. While complete team teaching is impossible due to time constraints, classroom teachers (on grade level teams) meet with the ENL teacher to plan corresponding units of study. Our AIT Reading Specialist also holds an ESL license. She works with ELLs who need additional literacy support. The ENL teacher works in close collaboration with classroom teachers to ensure that the work they are doing is aligned. Specific student needs, in addition to language acquisition level, are analyzed to determine how best to deliver instruction. The ENL teacher supports students by facilitating access to the content they are learning in class, through careful scaffolding of texts, specifically focusing on vocabulary and organization. All of our students receive integrated ELA instruction, again targeted in large part at increasing academic vocabulary to give them access to all content areas. We focus on both receptive and productive language aligned with grade level standards. According to the NYC Department of Education’s English Language Learner Policy and Reference Guide, “Schools are strongly encouraged to organize and offer home language arts (HLA) classes whenever possible” (p. 32). Because our population of 16 students speaks eight languages among them, it is impossible for us to offer home language arts classes. However, we 9  encourage all parents to promote L1 literacy at home and when possible, pair students with other students who speak the same language and can assist them. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our freestanding ENL model delivers core content by planning and aligning curriculum with classroom teachers. We use the workshop model and a balanced literacy approach to support Reading, Writing, Listening and Speaking. This includes research-based strategies such as strategy lessons, guided reading, interactive writing, conferring, shared reading, as well as specifically tailored instruction for our ELL students which incorporate modified texts, visual supports, dialogue journals, translated assignments and the use of applications and software such as Raz-Kids, BrainPoP, and Vocabulary City. The school uses classroom assessments as well as school-wide assessments (math and reading) to gauge whether students will need intervention services. ELL students who need additional intervention services are seen by the school's AIS and SETSS teachers for ELA and math as needed. All of these services are taught in English. Intervention services for ELA include but are not limited to: modified and leveled text, explicit phonics instruction (phonemic and phonological awareness), graphic organizers, small group instruction, guided & interactive reading, interactive & guided writing, reading comprehension activities with specific emphasis on inferring. For math: reading and solving word problems for meaning; work around computational strategies, the base 10 system, and number theory. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? As mentioned, our small population of ELLs speaks a wide variety of languages, so it is impossible to do extensive in school evaluation of their home languages throughout the year. However, the ENL teacher is in close contact with all of our ELL families and meets regularly with parents to discuss the academic development of their children; this includes discussing L1 literacy. For students who are more comfortable communicating in their L1, at first, we promote writing in that language and then have texts translated. In addition, we use staff knowledge of different languages to reach out to incoming students who speak those languages. Our parent body is very diverse and almost all are fluent in English. These parents are extremely supportive and have assisted us in evaluating a child’s L1 knowledge when we have had difficulty getting adequate information. We constantly seek ways to assess all students in their home language. We have not found them for all students as of yet. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE We have not had a student with an interrupted formal education, however, if we did, we would offer a number of supports. Initially, we would administer the SIFE Oral Interview Questionnaire, to determine if a child was in fact a SIFE student, and to gather as much information as possible about him/her. We would also administer the Multilingual Literacy SIFE Screener and the Writing Screener if necessary. We would use all information gathered to build as supportive a program as possible. We would determine what services the student needed, included but not limited to counseling, pre-literacy/early literacy support, and support with general school routines. b. Newcomer 0  Newcomers to the school are provided extensive support to help them acclimate and to improve both their social and academic English. Each newcomer is paired with a classmate(s), when possible, one who shares her L1, to ease her transition into the PS 89 environment. Students are provided with detailed bilingual picture dictionaries (Oxford Picture Dictionary) and help using them, and at times use Google Translate (as do their teachers) to communicate. In addition, we have been building a multi-language library and students have access to the books we have acquired. c. Developing ELLs who have been in the U.S. for less than three years are monitored by their classroom teachers and the ENL teacher to assess any specific language and cultural understanding barriers. The teachers regularly discuss their findings in order to develop tools to meet individual needs. The needs are addressed through a variety of language learning methods used in the mainstream and ELL classrooms as well as but not limited to lessons about American customs and cultural norms taught in correlation with lessons about the multicultural traditions of our students. These methods help students become comfortable around new traditions. Students’ backgrounds and cultures are celebrated and they are often asked to be “experts,” teaching about their specific countries and traditions. d. Long Term When we have LEP students receiving between 4 and 6 years of English Language Learning services, members of the AIT team meet early in the school year to discuss specific academic plans to help these students succeed. We analyze a variety of data gathered from numerous sources, including the previous spring’s NYSESLAT results, to see in what modality/modalities the student is struggling. Once that is determined, a course of action is designed to support the student in the areas (s)he needs. e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Former ENLs receive 90 minutes of targeted, integrated instruction in small groups or individually, during classroom instruction in Content Areas. Content Areas include Reading, Writing, Social Studies, Math, and Science. In addition, the ENL teacher communicates regularly with classroom teachers about how the former ELLs are doing and individually targets areas of concern. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs identified as having special needs are serviced as per their IEPs. Teachers of ELL-SWDs follow the academic and language goals outlined in their IEPs. Related service providers regularly meet with the ENL teacher to discuss student goals and ways to interweave the supports and strategies needed to progress. All teachers involved with a ELL-SWD collaborate to make sure that students can access the curriculum in all content areas, and use strategies in consultation with the SETSS teacher. All of these services are taught in English. Intervention services for ELA include but are not limited to: modified and leveled text, explicit phonics instruction (phonemic and phonological awareness), graphic organizers, small group instruction, guided & interactive reading, interactive & guided writing, reading comprehension activities with specific emphasis on inferring. For math: reading and solving word problems for meaning; work around computational strategies, the base 10 system, and number theory. In general, accommodations such as preferential seating, checklists, and peer models are also provided in coordination with specific IEP goals. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLs identified as having special needs are serviced as per their IEPs. Teachers of ELL-SWDs follow the academic and language goals outlined in their IEPs. All ELLs are in the least restrictive environment we can provide, and go to all school specials (ie., dance, art and music). Related service providers regularly meet with the ENL teacher to discuss student goals and ways to 1  integrate the supports and strategies needed to progress. All teachers involved with a ELL-SWD collaborate to make sure that students can access the curriculum in all content areas, and use strategies in consultation with the SETSS teacher. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. After analyzing data, we determine specific areas of need for all of our students. Test scores indicate that all of our students, except one, have been steadily improving in all areas of English language acquisition. The one student who dropped down a level (from expanding in spring 2015 to transitioning in spring 2016), is a student with a speech and language delay, according to his IEP. The ENL, classroom and speech teacher speak regularly to ensure his intervention services are aligned to best support his growth in all areas of language development. For students who need support, we determine what interventions are best suited individually and provide them. These include: Targeted small group instruction led by teachers, including Academic Intervention specialists and related service providers in all content areas. Wilson, Orton Gillingham and PAF are offered. This entails small group work with a specialist trained in these programs. Online programs such as CORE-LITERACY and Raz-Kids are used, in school and at home, for students who need additional reading practice. For Math, we recently incorporated Metamorphosis math which breaks down complex concepts and spirals skills so there are many opportunities to practice content specific language. In Science, the teacher has begun to explore explicit ways to ensure access to content understanding for English language learners. Pre-introducing content specific vocabulary, using multiple visuals, and building the curriculum around projects, has benefitted our ELLs. Using short jots in individual notebooks has allowed the teacher to better gauge understanding. Our ENL teacher meets with students and families prior to summer break, to ensure learning needs are supported through the summer. This includes books to take home, information on summer programs, and continuation of journal writing. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are considering facilitating a conversation partners program for interested parents and students. Because our community is very diverse and being multilingual is highly valued, there are numerous families who are interested in learning/practicing a language other than English. If we implement the program, we will connect families that want to speak a language other than English with speakers of that language, who want to practice English. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are offered translation services for many school activities: parent-teacher meetings, PTA meetings, school-wide events, after-school programs, and community outreach programs. Families of ELL students are contacted by the Parent Coordinator and meet with her when they first enter our school. Again, translation services are provided and the PC ensures the families are made aware of the many programs that are offered during the school as well as other afterschool opportunities. Our PTA also contacts and arranges for families to have a “buddy.” Another PS 89 family partners with the new family to help 2  them navigate the day-to-day questions they may have and helps them get to know the community at large. When possible, the family is offered a buddy family who speaks the same language. Each month when our PTA or teachers host events, our parent coordinator contacts families of ELL students to provide them with details of the events and to arrange for translation services if needed. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use an assortment of instructional methods to support ELLs. Students are provided with other support services (Speech, AIS Reading) when appropriate. Students have access to both classroom and school libraries, as well as leveled and non-leveled (grouped by subject/genre) books in the ELL classroom. We use technology throughout the school, in the form of Smart Boards, iPads, computer class. Ways in which we incorporate technology specifically for our ELLs are: books on cd (cds are sent home with some students), listening centers, bilingual online dictionaries, access to computer programs, and language learning websites such as Brainpop, which helps students become acclimated to idiomatic English (in class and at home; the ENL teacher informs parents about helpful websites during her meetings with them.) 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? As mentioned, our small population of ELLs speaks a wide variety of languages, so it is impossible to do extensive in school evaluation of their home languages throughout the year. However, the ENL teacher is in close contact with all of our ELL families and meets regularly with parents to discuss the academic development of their children; this includes discussing L1 literacy. For students who are more comfortable communicating in their L1, at first, we promote writing in that language and then have texts translated. In addition, we use staff knowledge of different languages to reach out to incoming students who speak those languages. Our parent body is very diverse and almost all are fluent in English. These parents are extremely supportive and have assisted us, throughout the year, in evaluating a child’s L1 knowledge when we have had difficulty getting adequate information. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services and resources correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels by aligning with the Common Core Standards. The ENL teacher regularly has Professional Development sessions with teachers of all grades to ensure that the ELL work being done is supporting what is going on in the general education classrooms. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? While we share a building with a middle school, IS 289, including spaces such as the library, auditorium, gymnasium, yard and cafeteria, due to scheduling/staffing constraints, we work independently to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs are met. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). As soon as families register at our school, the Parent Coordinator meets them and evaluates their needs. She helps acclimate families to their new surroundings, in and beyond the school walls. In addition to working one-on-one with families to recommend relevant programs/services, she helps find financial assistance for programs in the school, for families in need. After registration, families are invited to meet their child’s teacher, to have some time to get information about classroom procedures. Families are also brought up to date regarding any notices, newsletters, and handouts given out prior to that point in the year (if the school year has already started). Families are also notified of our school website by the Parent Coordinator, so they can access all materials related to the school and community. Our school website translates materials into many languages, and this is shown during the Parent Coordinator meeting. 3  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer any language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All staff engage in: PD cycles - 6-8 weeks of inquiry team work Meetings with the ENL teacher, who turnkeys most recent best practices All staff who work with ELLs engage in: ENL teacher observations and consultations ENL teacher: Study sabbatical at New York University during the 2015-2016 school year. Course of study focused on global education, psychology of immigrant origin youth, and literacy development for ELLs. DOE ENL professional development sessions headed by Paula Waldron 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All teachers receive 1 1/2 hours of professional development each week, as well as PD on Election Day and Chancellor Day. There are other opportunities for PD with the math coach. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ELL teacher schedules individual meetings with parents of all students by November of the school year. Meetings are generally scheduled on Tuesdays between 8:00 and 8:40, before students arrive. For parents who cannot meet before school, flexible time slots are offered. At the initial meeting, we discuss hopes and expectations for the school year, and how the child will be serviced to best meet her needs. When needed, we use an over the phone or in person translator. 4  In addition to the initial meeting, the ENL teacher has an open-door policy for parents. Because we have a small ELL population, she is able to maintain a close relationship with most families and makes herself available to meet with them whenever they have questions or concerns. In addition, the ENL teacher attends family mornings and classroom culminations to further foster an inclusive dynamic. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. PS 89 does not have a large ELL population (though there are many children who are bilingual). We are fortunate to have a strong community that integrates, engages and assimilates the ELL families. Our ELL population uniformly has access to computer and e-mail. As such, they are able to use our school website on which every family has an account and is able to access thorough and interactive information. The information addresses school functions and events, individual class pages, extracurricular activities, community affairs, DOE mandates and deadlines, after-school programs, neighborhood and city resources, all calendars, emergency and safety information and many other things. The website can be translated into different languages. As soon as a family registers, we connect them to the website. In addition, if we make any kind of determination that the family requires translation services, we ensure that for vital things such as Parent-Teacher Conferences, those services are available. The Parent Coordinator maintains e-mail lists for each grade and sends out information frequently; all families are available through e-mail. In certain cases where there has been a significant language barrier, the Parent Coordinator has facilitated a “translator” who is also added to the e-mail list, who can translate all pertinent information to the family. We have a very proactive and dynamic PTA which maintains a Class Parent system. Each class has at least 2 Class Parents—the Class Parents also maintain e-mail lists and they send out frequent e-mails that target the specific needs of that class. The Class Parents alert the Parent Coordinator to any family in which they feel a language or other barrier is present and the Parent Coordinator makes individual, concerted efforts to engage the family. The Class Parents make sure that each family in the class is invited to all events (including the school's international potluck dinner each fall) which provides a wonderful opportunity for all families in the class to socialize and get to know one another. The Parent Coordinator makes sure that any family with a financial hardship receives complimentary admission to every event. PS 89 is committed to making every family part of our community. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NA 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Veronica Najjar, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 89 School DBN: 02M089 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Veronica Najjar Title Principal Ria Seplowin Assistant Principal Connie Schraft Parent Coordinator Betsy Chairman ENL/Bilingual Teacher Carolyn Klotz Parent Dahlia Bouari/1st grade Teacher/Subject Area NA NA NA Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Karen Berman School Counselor Bonnie Leboy Sileni Nazario NA NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Sileni Nazario Other NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01/16 1/1/01/16 1/1/01/16 1/1/01/16 1/1/01/16 1/1/01/16 1/1/01/16 1/1/01/16 1/1/01/16 1/1/01/16 1/1/01/16 1/1/01/16 1/1/01/16 1/1/01/16 1/1/01/16 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M089 School Name: PS 89 Superintendent: Bonnie Laboy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Connie Schraft Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At registration, parents complete the Home Language Identification Survey, in which they indicate their preferred language. Our ENL teacher interviews the families and assesses the students. The Parent Coordinator and school secretary ask families if they would like to receive school letters and other communication in their home language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 8  Language Bengali, Japanese, Chinese, Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Tuesday News - weekly Parent Handbook - September Parent-Teacher Conference announcements - November and March Handouts from Curriculum Night - September Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Curriculum Night - September plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 9  Parent Teacher Conferences - November and March Family Engagement Evening - May Family Fridays - October through May 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff meetings, individual meetings with teachers, Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We have a conference with families at registration to discuss the ENL program and Translation/Interpretation services that are available to them. The ENL teacher hosts meetings for families during the mandated curriculum night, as well as in the mornings and speaks to families about their choices for language programs. If parents are unable to attend one of the meetings, the ENL teacher arranges individual conferences. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The administration and parent coordinator will survey parents mid-year and gather feedback on the Translation and Interpretation services the school has provided. After using the Translation and Interpretation services at conferences, we check in with families to determine that they understood the content of what was shared and inform them that this service is available whenever they need it. 0 
