 75M094 School Name: P.S. M094 Principal: JEANNE BRADLEY   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 75M094 212-266-5811 Fax: Jbradley@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: P94M 307500011094 K-12 55 Battery Place NY, NY 10280 212-266-5810 Phone Number: Jeanne Bradley School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Jeanne Bradley Victoria Orozco Robyn Epstein EminesseGonzalez n/a Ashley Duran N/A District Information Geographical District: 75 Superintendent’s Office Address: KetlerLouissaint Superintendent: 400 First Avenue New York, New York KLouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1502 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Kathleen LeFevre Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue NY 10001 KLefevr@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1534 Phone Number: 212-802-1655 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jeanne Bradley Victoria Orozco Robyn Epstein n/a n/a Ashley Duran Marie Johnson n/a EminesseGonzalez Lauren Handfuss Danielle Fulton *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable SLT Chairperson, Teacher Teacher Teacher   Jeannette Roja Wendy Leary NilsaSanchez Lisa Dzliao Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We are a dynamic and reflective organization that believes every student will meet and exceed their potential when:  We provide an individualized and engaging common core aligned curriculum that infuses the visual and performing arts.  We provide strong positive behavior supports and social emotional learning.  We continually learn through ongoing collaboration, inquiry and goal setting.    We provide a safe and nurturing environment that fosters exploration and expression, making our students ready for college and career.  We engage families and the community in all aspects of school life.  We believe that all of our children have something remarkable to share. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P94M is a multi-sited school (eight sites) providing instruction self-contained special education students in 6:1:1, 8:1:1, 12:1:1 ratios and inclusion programs, from kindergarten to students turning 21. At P94M, we believe that the Arts serve as a vehicle for content area instruction and have developed rich and longstanding community partnerships to support that vision. In 2008 our school was selected as the first District 75 school to receive the MTI/Shubert BROADWAY JR. grant, a three-year initiative designed to create and support a school-based musical theater program. With special funding from Freddie & Myrna Gershon through a partnership with ArtsConnection, our musical theater program, now called STAARS (Sequential Teaching in Arts Action Research and Scholarship), has expanded to all of our sites to include children from K-12. As STAARS has grown and staff is involved school-wide in each production, the visual and performing arts is becoming more integrated into classroom teaching strategies for ELA, Science, Social Studies and Math. P94M teachers continue to co-plan units of study which incorporate cross-curricular approaches using the arts as a primary vehicle for student engagement. The P94M STAARS methodology, which uses a holistic approach to arts education that integrates academics and clinical therapies delivered through the four art forms, has been presented at national conferences in arts and special education. It was the subject of a new documentary called SPECTRUM OF HOPE, and is being studied by a team of psychiatrists, neurologists, educators and paediatricians from the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Temple University, Pace University, SUNY/Stony Brook and NYU Langone Hospital.  Sequential instruction in the arts builds students’ frame of reference from one year to the next, following the NYS Learning Standards in the Arts, the NYC DOE BLUEPRINT FOR THE ARTS and the National Core Arts Standards.  Teaching art can be inter-woven creatively into every subject in the classroom, increasing student interest dramatically. What a child is learning in math can and should extend to the dance studio, while what he is learning in music can and should overlap with ELA. There is always a way to teach everything through art.  Arts instruction unlocks many skills needed in other areas of a child’s social, emotional, physical and academic life. Skill sets taught in arts classes include fine and gross motor, speech, social interaction, emotional regulation and self-awareness on many levels.  Action in the teaching and learning during performing arts classes reflects excellent differentiation: kinesthetic activity, visual cuing using bodies and symbols, verbal instruction and repetition, vocal and instrumental music, interpersonal learning activities and intra-personal reflections.  Research shows that there is a connection between music and the ability of the brain’s functions to change over time, up to age twelve. The STAARS program is based upon research already conducted on the arts and cognitive functioning, and may also help advance that research in future years. In addition to our work with ArtsConnection, we are one of eight schools citywide, who have a "pARTnership" with Marquis Studios, providing teaching artist residencies that introduces many of our students into an inclusion setting through arts. Two CASA grants from City Council Members Daniel Garodnick and Rosie Mendez allowed our partnerships with Marquis Studios and ArtsConnection to deepen in inclusion arts through movement and music and to explore career readiness through our High School Theater Careers residency. Positive Behavior Supports 0  P94 has a Positive Behavior Intervention System (PBIS) committee that meets on a monthly basis in order to devise proactive strategies to promote appropriate student behavior and a positive school climate. A continuum of behavioral support is being structured that will allow for staff members at each site to utilize a uniform plan of practices and interventions. Many of our interventions focus on preventing negative student behaviors from occurring by developing and promoting a positive sense of community and support within our school. This includes promoting academic achievement in students, contributing to the emotional/social competence and growth of students, and administrative support of school staff. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our key area of focus for 2018-19 school year will center around “Rigorous Instruction.” While we have made significant progress in this area through the creation of curriculum teams and newly implemented curricular resources, we continue to strive to assure that all students are challenged through the implementation of meaningful units of study and students have access to relevant and interesting materials and resources. This is especially true in our recently developed high school program, where curriculum teams are working to develop units aligned to the CDOS and Common Core standards that allow students to partake in appropriately challenging activities that translate into meaningful work products. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Aligning with the Framework for Great Schools, P94M will continue to deepen its 2017-18 instructional focus, of building student independence. In the 2017-18 school year,our instructional focus was "All P94M students will engage in instructional activities that are both cognitively challenging and accessible to all learners. Teachers’ planning will strategically provide opportunities for independent practice and instructional supports during lessons, with the aim of building students’ persistence through new or challenging tasks." In the 2018-19 school year, our instructional focus will highlight the need to support student independence; our instructional focus is: "All P94M students will engage in instructional activities that are cognitively challenging and have been strategically planned by teachers to support student independence, autonomy persistence." 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75M094 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 408 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 70 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A 11 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 81.9% % Reduced Lunch 18.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 44.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 16.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2% 24% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 37 86.9% 0.2% 99.8% 30.4% 7.1% 1.2% 8 5% 5.9 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017-2018 school year, P94M identified the instructional focus to be "All P94M students will engage in instructional activities that are both cognitively challenging and accessible to all learners. Teachers’ planning will strategically provide opportunities for independent practice and instructional supports during lessons, with the aim of building students’ persistence through new or challenging tasks." Throughout the school year, teachers were provided with Professional Development and feedback specifically related to Danielson Domain 3c: Engaging Students in Learning. Tied to our instructional focus, our goal for rigorous instruction for the 2017-19 school year was " By June, 2018, students in 6:1:1 class ratios will engage in rigorous, individualized structured teaching work stations as demonstrated by an increase of 15% of teachers rather Effective or Highly Effective in the area of student engagement on observations over the 2016-17 school year." Through targeted professional development, strategic coaching, inter-visitation and feedback, we had an increase of 18% of teachers receiving Effective or Highly Effective ratings in Danielson Component 3c. As we reviewed assessment data from the 2017-18 school year, the area with the least amount of growth for our students was on our Developmental Writing Continuum. While 90% of students gained at least one skill as per the continuum, the growth was limited with only 60% of students gaining two or more skills. Through a qualitative analysis of student writing portfolios, it was determined that students were dependent upon teacher prompting and models. We determined that for the 2018-19 school year, we must focus on explicit writing instruction, beyond handwriting, that supported each child's unique needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students will engage in rigorous, individualized instruction related to writing, demonstrating 85% of students gaining at least three skills as measured by the P94M Developmental Writing Continuum. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implementation First Author's Writing Curriculum in all 12:1:1 and 8:1:1 classes Teachers of 12:1:1 and 8:1:1 Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration (AP of Literacy) Analyze trends within student baseline writing assessments to determine points of entry for curriculum teams. Administration, curriculum teams, all students Sept 2018-October 2018 Curriculum teams will develop resources and revise the curriculum maps with an to reflect entry points for multiple levels of writing. Administration, Curriculum teams Teachers will participate in a series of Professional Development sessions during administrative periods Two curriculum teams will engage in a Japanese Lesson Study using revised resources from the curriculum teams and Occupational Therapists. Administration Instructional Coach Teachers Teachers Paraprofessionals October 2018- January 2019 November 2018-June-2019 December 2018- June 2019 Teachers of 12:1:1 and 8:1:1 classes Instructional Coach Administration Curriculum Teams Administration Curriculum Teams Administration Instructional Coaches Curriculum Teams Administration Teachers Related Service Providers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parents will be invited to a Curriculum Open House in September, 2018. 4   Parents will be invited to visit classrooms monthly to observe their child at individual work stations  Parent training opportunities will be available on writing instruction at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Core Curriculum Resources to purchase First Author's Curricular Resources    Funding to support professional development Funding in OTPS to purchase any necessary classroom materials Funding support for the planning and implementation of SBO approved six half-days of PD throughout the academic year.  Per session funds to support Curriculum Team Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 90% all P94M students will gain at least one skill as per the Developmental Writing Continuum. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) P94M Developmental Writing Continuum Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? P94M has an active Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS) committee that has met monthly to norm and create a system of school-wide behavioral expectations as well as site based celebrations of positive behaviors. Additionally, each P94M site has a Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) that meets weekly to address any behavioral concerns and develop targeted behavioral support plans. Through the work of the PBIS committee, and the PPT teams, for our students with the highest level of need as per their Functional Behavioral Assessment and IEP, we have seen 100% of our students with crisis management support show a reduction of at least 10% in their targeted maladpative behaviors through the ongoing progress monitoring of Behavior Intervention Plans in 10-week cycles throughout the school year. During the 2018-19 school year, we will continue to support pro-social student conduct by identifying replacement behaviors to the behaviors that impact learning for our students with crisis management needs. Student support strategies were be reinforced by the collaborative efforts of the school instructional team, including classroom-based support by the school counselors and the Pupil Personnel Team. In doing so, we will reinforced a growth mindset, that student behavior can continually change over time with the proper strategies and support. As our students made such significant progress over the 2017-18 school year in this area, we will expect to see continued increase in the demonstration of replacement behaviors at a steady pace, with at least a 15% rate of change from baseline to endpoint, in the hopes of continuing to de-certify students from the need for 1:1 crisis paraprofessional support over time. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P94M students across grade levels with identified behavior support needs will demonstrate a 15% increase in pro-social replacement behaviors identified on Behavior Intervention Plans as per progress monitoring sheets during the 2018-2019 school year from baseline to endpoint. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Identification and data review of all P94M students with Behavior Intervention Plans (BIPs) Students with BIPs Sept. 2018 Counselors, Teachers, Unit Coordinators, PPT members Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, PPT members Provide staff and parent training across all sites in BIP progress monitoring tools and best practices Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Parents Sept 2018-December, 2018 Implement direct instruction in social skills competencies as aligned with pro-social replacement behaviors identified in BIPs Students, Teachers, Counselors Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Counselors Conduct progress monitoring and hold progress monitoring meetings with parents in accordance with 10-week mandated cycles to track the frequency of students' pro-social behaviors. Students, Families Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Counselors, Principal, Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parents will be invited to a Parent Workshop on managing student behavior at home in March 2019.  Parents will be invited to 10-week progress monitoring meetings to review behavioral data  During progress monitoring meetings, school counselors and classroom teams will review the behavioral data with parents and revise and modify BIPs as necessary. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Diem substitute funding to provide coverage for training related to FBA/BIP development, Positive Behavioral Supports, Therapeutic Crisis Intervention 7  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded X X Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, P94M students across grade levels with identified behavior support needs will demonstrate a 7% increase in pro-social replacement behaviors identified on Behavior Intervention Plans as per progress monitoring sheets from baseline. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. BIP Progress monitoring tool Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Research indicates that when teachers engage in high-quality collaboration that they perceive as extensive and helpful, there is both an individual and collective benefit. Collaboration in general and about assessment in particular among teachers is associated with increases in their students’ achievement, their performance, and their peers’ students’ achievement. During the 2017-2018 school year, P94M classroom teachers met collaboratively to review and rate student portfolios using the ATLAS protocol; 90% of P94M teachers responded favorably to questions on the 2018-19 School Survey about teacher collaboration, to further this work, we as a school want to include Related Service Providers and Coverage teacher to encourage interdisciplinary collaboration as well as cross content collaborations as well as opportunities for teachers to visit other classrooms to develop best practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Teachers, Paraprofessionals and Related Service Providers across all P94M sites will have ongoing opportunities for inter-departmental and cross-content collaborations to ensure fluidity of school-based supports to meet the academic, behavioral, and physical development needs of all students, as evidenced by an increase of over 100% in shared collaborations and inter-visitations. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development during instructional half days about collaborative model of services. Classroom teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Related Service Providers Paraprofessionals Revised Scheduling to allow for collaborative team meetings Classroom teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Meet with teachers during Initial Planning Conferences to create a professional goal and select peers to visit. Teachers September 2018 Administration During observation feedback sessions, create a new professional goal for classroom teachers, selecting a new peer to visit. Classroom teachers November 2018- June 2019  Administration  Coaches  Unit Coordinators  Administration  Unit Coordinators  Administration  Teachers  Unit  Coordinators Instructional Coaches  Administration  Unit Coordinators  Teachers  Instructional Coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to attend site based workshops about the collaborative model of service delivery. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 0  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Substitute coverage for cohort meetings and inter-visitations  Per session funds to be used for Professional Development   District 75 PD opportunities will be reviewed and encouraged. Substitute coverage will be allocated.  Administrative scheduling of half day team meetings, agenda protocol and self-assessment protocol Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all classroom teachers will have completed one inter-visitation of a colleague's classroom to observe a best practice. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. P94M Intervisitation Documentation Tool Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P94M continuously support the professional growth of its staff. It is the norm for staff to seek out professional development and these requested workshops are often approved by the principal. Many staff members have attended district-given workshops: Structured Methods in Language Education (SMILE), Universal Design for Learning (UDL), Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS), Birch Institute, various speech, occupational, and physical therapy-related workshops, teaching the core vocabulary. We have had coaches from the district to support our staff in Mathematics Instruction, Literacy, and strategies for students with autism. This year, P94M has set aside six half-days in addition to the Chancellor’s Conference days for additional staff professional development. These half-days are mostly led by our own staff to share best practices and turn-key workshops they have attended. P94M’s priority need for 2017-2016 is to empower staff voice in the school’s decision-making process through the creation of various leadership teams. As evidenced by the 2016-2017 School Survey, 77% of teachers when positive responses in the area of collective responsibility, but 67% of teachers stated that a lot or all of the teachers take responsibility for improving the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P94M will expand the transition planning process through the development of increased jobsite opportunities for students to engage in work-based learning experiences to maximize college and career readiness, independent living and post-secondary options as evidenced by a 100% increase in participation in these opportunities 2 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Create a transition team consisting of an administrator, unit coordinator and high school teachers/ related service providers. HS Teachers Related Service Providers Administrator Transition Coordinator September 2018- June 2019 Administrators HS Instructional Team Instructional Coaches Transition Coordinator September 2018- October 2018 HS Teachers Administration September 2018- October 2018 December 2018-January 2019 Transition Coordinator HS Teachers Administration Instructional Coach Transition Coordinator HS Teachers Administration Instructional Coach Transition Coordinator Contact local businesses to create job sites for High School Students. Local Business Establishments High School Students Transition Coordinator Review student Level 1 vocational assessment results from High School students to match students with preferred job sites. High School Students Review Student Level 3 Vocational Assessment Data and Level 1 Vocational Assessment Data to determine second semester jobsite placement. High School Teacher Team Transition Coordinator High School Students High School Teacher Team Transition Coordinator 3  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to a September Curriculum Open House where Transition curriculum, including job sites, will be discusses Parents will be asked to complete Level 1 Vocational Assessments for their children Parents will be invited to job fair and job share events in May 2019 and June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. District 75 Professional Development opportunities Administrative Scheduling of Coordinator/Coaches at each site Per session funding for inquiry and committees OTPS funds for materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all High School aged students will participate in one job site opportunity, demonstrating an increase of skills on the Level 3 vocational assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Level 3 Vocational Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P94M’s priority need for the 2018-2019 is to increase parent active involvement and engagement through the creation of volunteer opportunities at the school. Surveys of parents indicate that parents want to take a more active role in the school community and parents were invited to volunteer at field day, Family Arts Day and the P94M Arts Showcase. According to the New York City Department of Education School's Learning Environment Survey, 85% of families reported that they felt a sense of community within the P94M school community. Parents across all P94M locations have stated that they want opportunities to speak with other families and share resources. While parents had the opportunity to attend monthly "Coffee with the Cabinet" meetings in the 2017-18 school year, parents have reported through P94M Parent Surveys and informally, that they want fewer more targeted trainings and workshops with opportunities to socialize and speak with fellow parents. In the 2018-19 school year, we will partner with CBOs and District 75 resources to provide a bi-monthly parent workshop series on topics requested by parents, giving them an opportunity to learn about a topic of interest and interact with fellow P94M parents across all sites. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P94M will foster a sense of community through collaborations with families, community based organizations and other stakeholders to offer a parent workshop series inviting parents to 5 targeted trainings throughout the school year as evidenced by at least 90% of families responding positively to questions related to school community on the School Learning Environment Survey. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Conduct quarterly parent surveys in October, January, March and June to assess parent needs and concerns. Parents September 2018-June 2019 Administration Parent Coordinator Classroom Teachers Schedule bi-Monthly Parent workshops will be conducted regarding student independence and transition needs. Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Utilize Remind System, Email Systems, School Messenger to notify and alert parents as to meeting dates and time Parents September 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Related Service Providers Administration Parent Coordinator Classroom teachers Coach/Coordinators Coaches Related Service Providers Community Based Organizations Administration Parent Coordinator If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. OPWDD 6  District 75 Transition Services Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  CBO Participation in planning and funding weekend family events  PS for Parent Coordinator   Grants  OTPS for communication media and materials School Leadership Team and Parent Association funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded X X Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019,parents will be invited to attend three parent workshops as evidenced by parent sign in sheets and workshop agendas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. P94M Service Tracking metrics. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) small group, individual During the school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) informal assessment SANDI Running Records IEP Developmental Continuum Mathematics informal assessment Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Emotional Literacy Interactive Read Aloud GetReady to Learn Handwriting Without Tears Words Their Way Fundations SMILE Sounds in Motion Core Vocabulary Workshop Model Integrated Model hands on activities in small groups modeling interactive writings EQUALS small group, During the school day SANDI Workshop Model individual IEP Integrated Model hands on activities in small groups interactive activities 8  Science informal assessment Workshop Model small group during the school day PBLrubrics Integrated Model Social Studies informal assessment PBL integrated lessons hands on activities Workshop Model small group, individual PBLrubrics Integrated Model PBL during the school day Through mandated direct counseling or group services. During the school day At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) OORSreports FBA BIP ABC charts anecdotals integrated lessons hands on activities Manhattan Day Treatment serve the highest risk students. They implement school based positive behavior support, social skills instruction and support P94M Emotional Literacy Education. Additionally, they provide Outreach to families. School Psychologists serve mandated students with direct counseling services. Implement positive behavior support/sensory plans in collaboration with other related service providers. PBIS TCIS Support Emotional Literacy Education 9  and Social Skills Education. Individual or group interaction 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. . 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). . Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. . 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). . 3  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). . 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. . 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 4  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 75M094, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 75M094 will support parents and families of students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 6  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 7  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Parent Curriculum breakfast ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association); ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Unique to 75M094:  Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year supporting or hosting Family Day events.  Hosting events that provide supports for men taking assertive leadership in education for their children.  Hosting events to support parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents  Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) by providing facilitative supports such as child-care and diversified scheduling  Parent led school leadership team sub-committees (i.e., fundraising) 8  Development and distribution of school-specific Parent Handbook.  development of a school website with family access School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P94M, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● provide a Parent Handbook to support families in the understanding of all school policies and procedures ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 9  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities based on parent training included on their child's IEP ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Meet and Greet and Famiiy Days I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● providing Parent Training as indicated on the IEP 0  ● supporting the school's Parent Association  ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities 1  Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 20 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> P94M currently has a total of 75 English Language Learners, and as evidenced by the 2018 NYSESLAT scores, 43 of them are entering, 23 are emerging, 7 are transitioning, 2 are expanding. Our ELL students are divided into the following grades: (7) Kindergarten, (7) first grade, (5) second grade, (4) third grade, (11) fourth grade, (6) fifth grade, (8) sixth grade, (10) seventh grade, (6) eighth grade, (3) ninth grade, (4) tenth grade, (3) eleventh grade, and (1) twelfth grade. The NYSESLAT scores are evidenced in the domains of listening, speaking, reading and writing. These four modalities are targeted specifically in this program, which involves reading directions, communicating with peers, listening to instructions, and writing personal reflections. The focus on reading, writing, listening and speaking will serve to increase NYSESLAT scores and also ties directly into the Common Core city-wide expectations, which indicate that schools should target the following five modalities: reading, writing, listening, speaking and language, all of which are covered through the Title III program. The pedagogical practice implemented for the ELLs includes both the integrated and stand-alone models. Support for ELLs and content area instruction is evidenced in ongoing collaborative work with classroom teachers through the implementation of ENL strategies and methodologies, such as scaffolding (modeling, bridging, schema building, contextualization, text representation and meta-cognitive development), total physical response, and CALLA. Moreover, various learning styles within a multisensory approach and multi-cultural materials that reflect the culture of our students are utilized. Augmentative devices are also used to provide language instruction for our students. All instruction is aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards and New Language Arts Progressions, as well as the Essential Elements for math, ELA and science for our Alternate Assessment students. In addition to ENL instruction, students receive the following related services: Speech therapy, Occupational therapy, Physical therapy and Counseling. This year, P94M will be conducting a supplemental language-based instructional program for our ELL population. Under Title III, the program will serve a total of 12 ELL students during the 2018 -2019 school year. P94M’s “Learning English through Science & Sustainability” () program will be implemented to support language development, communication skills, as well as both emotional literacy and academic literacy for participating students. The focus will be on the integration of sustainability, and the middle school science curriculum. Our ELL students will learn about the materials that make up the world around us. This meets the following CDOS Standards: 1. Career Development: Students will be knowledgeable about the world of work, explore career options, and relate personal skills, aptitudes, and abilities to future career decisions. Learning standards in the area of career awareness and exploration may be evidenced by completing a career plan; applying decision-making skills in the selection of a career option; analyzing skills 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information and abilities necessary for specific career options and participating in work experiences as described in Section II of the New York State Work-Based Learning Manual (http://www.p12.nysed.gov/cte/wbl/home.html). 2. Integrated Learning: Students will demonstrate how academic knowledge and skills are applied in the workplace and other settings. This may be evidenced by applying academic knowledge and skills across multiple settings and demonstrating the ability to research, interpret, analyze and evaluate information. The activities will also be connected and aligned to Common Core Anchor Standard 10 for Reading Informational Text, which states that students, with prompting and support, read and comprehend complex literary and informational texts independently and proficiently. The Title III program will also meet the following Common Core Anchor Standards for Speaking and Listening through reading instructional manuals and working with partners to follow directions and build their sustainable school model. Comprehension and Collaboration: 1. Prepare for and participate effectively in a range of conversations and collaborations with diverse partners, building on others' ideas and expressing their own clearly and persuasively. 2. Integrate and evaluate information presented in diverse media and formats, including visually, quantitatively, and orally. Presentation of Knowledge and Ideas: 4. Present information, findings, and supporting evidence such that listeners can follow the line of reasoning and organization, development, and style are appropriate to task, purpose, and audience. 6. Adapt speech to a variety of contexts and communicative tasks, demonstrating command of formal English when indicated or appropriate. The program will include 12 students whose IEPs indicate bilingual instruction or ESL. The students will be divided among two 6:1:1 groups that will include two teachers certified to teach ENL, and three bilingual paraprofessionals. The bilingual paraprofessionals will be hired to reflect the native languages of our students. We will decide what languages will be required based on the enrollment of our students in the the Title III instructional program. The native languages of our students are as follows: Spanish, Cantonese/Mandarin, Bengali, Russian, and Fulani. Each class will consist of students in grades 6-8. These students have been invited to participate in the program based on their NYSESLAT reading and writing scores. A third paraprofessional has been budgeted since one of the students participating in the program requires a crisis paraprofessional as per their IEP. The program will be held at P94M@188 where the majority of anticipated ELL students participating in the program are located. However, eligible ELL students from all sites will be invited. Teachers will assist parents in completing the “Change of After School Drop for Special Education Students” form to have students bussed from other sites to the P188 location. The Title III program is a supplemental instructional program that will take place for ten [10] consecutive Wednesdays & Thursdays, starting at the beginning of March 2018, ending at the beginning of May from 3:05 PM to 6:05 PM for a total of 30 instructional hours. These hours coincide with our Middle School After School program which will provide bussing for the students. The language of instruction will be English. The supervising administrator will receive compensation for two hours each session. Her normal working hours end at 4:00 PM. Each instructional Wednesday students will attend a walking trip to learn about sustainable materials, and each instructional Thursday students will utilize what they’ve learned on their field trip to add to their final project. For their final project, students will work in groups of three, and in their group they will design and build a sustainable school model. Students will use the materials from, "Don't Runoff: Engineering an Urban Landscape." These materials will be purchased using Title III funds. Students will present their work at the final session. The goal of the Title III Program is to have students learn English through science and sustainability, while using the four 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information modalities of language: reading, writing, listening, and speaking as they relate to the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT). Week 1: Students will visit the 6th Street Garden located on 6th Street, and Avenue B. Here they will explore different building materials that are used for recycled art. Examples of recycled art include; glass, plastic, metal, and paper. Week 2: Students will visit the playground on 5th street between Avenues C & D, and the new playground on 12th Street, between Avenues B & C. Students will observe the two playground designs and examine how they support sustainability. Students will pay close attention to the green areas within and around the playgrounds. Week 3: Students will walk to Con Edison and observe the visual air pollutants. Students will visit the Solar 1 Garden nearby and explore renewable resources which include; solar, and wind energy. Week 4: Students will visit Raclette, a restaurant that promotes sustainable foods in the lower east side. They will interview the owner to understand how sustainable foods reduce our carbon footprint. During this trip, students will also see how restaurants grow their own food and compost their own food at the garden across from Raclette. Week 5: No field trips scheduled. Students will dedicate this time to complete their final projects. <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> The use of educational resources from the Internet and new media, such as SMARTBoards and iPads, will be employed to enrich ENL instruction for all categories of students targeting the individual learning styles and intelligences. The use of technology will be incorporated into ENL instruction and sustainable projects. P94M will use Title III funds to purchase four iPads to create visual and oral presentations of student experiences throughout the program. According to J. Hur and S. Suh (2012), digitally interactive whiteboards, podcasts, and digital storytelling are pieces of technology that can be used to impact the vocabulary of ELL students (Hur & Suh, 2012). Additionally, four licenses for Imagine Language and Literacy will be purchased for use on the iPads. Imagine Language and Literacy is a computer program and iPad application that helps build core literacy and academic language skills. The teachers will create a profile for four students who are newcomers. The newcomers will be selected based on their reading and writing scores on the 2018 NYSESLAT. After taking a benchmark assessment, using native language support, Imagine Learning will provide strategic language instruction at each student’s individual level. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The ENL teachers, will conduct the professional development that will be afforded to paraprofessionals participating in the Title III program and to one administrator for their edification. They will be equipped with tools to target language instruction and identify deficient skills, while also learning techniques adapted to meet the needs of ELLs. Professional 6  Part C: Professional Development development will take place for five one hour instructional sessions, and will be held on Title III instructional Wednesdays from 6:05-7:05pm. Title III staff will read 50 Strategies for Teaching English Language Learners (3rd Edition) by Herrel & Jordan. Each week will be dedicated to a different chapter which will be read prior to the meeting. Then, staff will view a short video reviewing the strategies that have been read and discuss their implications on teaching ELLs. Since paraprofessionals are new to the program this year, the ENL teachers will discuss the same topics that were discussed last year. Week 1: Chapter 1: Predictable Routines and Signals Reducing Anxiety p. 16-19 View Video: Predictable Routines and Signals Week 2: Chapter 9: Academic Language Scaffolding: Supporting Students Use of Language in Academic Settings p. 56-61 No video Week 3: Chapter 11: Total Physical Response: Integrating Movement into Language Acquisition p. 69-72 View Video: Manipulative Strategies Week 4: Chapter 15: Partner Work: Practicing Verbal Interaction p. 88-93 No video Week 5: Chapter 22: Integrated Curriculum Projects: Using Authentic Projects to Bring Knowledge Together p. 134-139 View Video: Cooperative Learning Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: P94M is an essential part of the Lower East Side community to many of our students and their families. Parents of our ELLs are coming from culturally diverse backgrounds speaking six different languages: Spanish, Cantonese, Mandarin, Russian, Bengali and Fulani. To familiarize parents with the program, schedule, and instructional goals, a Title III letter will be sent out to parents with school specific information describing our after school program. All informational materials will be sent home in English as well as translated into parents' preferred languages. During the teachers’ administrative period, two ENL teachers and the parent coordinator will deliver the parent orientation, which will be held the last Wednesday of January for 45 minutes beginning at 2:15 pm and ending at 3:00 pm. An administrator will also be present during the orientation. The parent orientation will be held during school hours rather than after school in an effort to provide more funding to the Title III program itself for instructional purposes. 7  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities At the orientation, parents will be provided with the class schedule, the instructional methods that will be used in teaching each unit, and how individual differences will be addressed in the classroom. We expect 12 parents to be in attendance at the parent orientation. If any of the parents in attendance require interpretation, the bilingual paraprofessionals and teacher will be available to translate. Parents will be invited to attend the Title III instructional program alongside their children. They will also be encouraged to support the program by assisting with field trips. Parents will also be encouraged to provide their own input and recommendations. As a culminating event, during the last program date, parents are invited to attend our Title III program showcase which will consist of students sharing their completed projects with their families. We will celebrate our students’ success in P94’s Title III program. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $9478.40  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff $0 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Instructional Program Total: $8,033.70 1 supervisor x 10 instructional days x 2 hr. x $63.45 = $1,269.00 2 teachers x 10 instructional days x 3 hrs. x $60.65 = $3,639.00 3 paraprofessionals x 10 instructional days x 3 hrs. x $34.73 = $3,125.70 Professional Development Total: $1444.70 1 supervisor x 5 professional days x 1 hr. x $63.45 = $317.25 2 teachers x 5 professional days x 1 hr. x $60.65 = $606.50 3 paraprofessionals x 5 professional days x 1 hr. x $34.73 = $520.95 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials $1,637.60 4 iPads x 290 = 1,160 8 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 4 iPad cases x 20.35 = 81.40 4 Headphones with microphone x 27.37 = $109.48 Don't Runoff: Engineering an Urban Landscape Kit x 231.72 = $231.72 Don't Runoff: Engineering an Urban Landscape Educator Guide x 55.00 = $55.00 4 Imagine Learning Licenses x $250 = $1,000 _____ Parent Engagement: Refreshments for Parents x $250 = $250 12,366  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $1,000 $0 $250 12,366 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name The Spectrum School Borough Manhattan School Number 94 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jeanne Bradley Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Makini Velazquez, ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Yael Perelis, ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Ketler Louissaint Assistant Principal Jasmin Maldonado Coach School Counselor Parent Andrea Montalvo Parent Coordinator Halima Butler Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 411 0 Total number of ELLs 76 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 18.49%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools we currently use to assess the early literacy skills of our ELL students, that can access level A books, are Developmental Reading Assessments and Fountas & Pinnell. SANDI, ABLLS and NYSAA are used for our students participating in alternate assessment. We will use ECAM for our math assessments, and continue to use SANDI, SANDI Fast, and NYSAA. Additionally, we use teacher-created assessments such as: checklists, and a the Developmental Writing Continuum. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Within our pacing calendars we reserve time for our formative assessments, such as: Fountas Pinell, and Go Math assessments. Our Google Drive assists us in collecting and sharing resources for formative and summative assessments. For example, all of the data for our Developmental Writing Continuum is collected through Google Forms and shared on the Google Drive. Additionally, our school provides teachers with co-planning administrative periods to collaborate on instruction and assessment planning. Teachers also have the opportunity to engage in inter-visitation to observe and learn from more 1  experienced teachers to improve their assessments. Our school provides in-house professional development training in various areas of assessment. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs based on student attainment of IEP goals, SANDI, ABLLs, NYSAA scores, and school-wide assessments. We do not necessarily use the NYSESLAT scores to evaluate program success because the NYSESLAT is a standardized assessment, and standardized assessments are not intended for our population of students with disabilities. All (but two) of our ELLs are otherwise assessed alternatively. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL teacher supports classroom teachers with administering assessments and gathering data to further inform instruction. Teachers have combined preps and meet once a week for a double period in their grade teams. With the ENL teacher, they will review data, student work, and revise lesson plans that meet students needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our ELL students receive high quality intensive researched-based instruction in the arts, SMILE, Sounds in Motion, and Fundations/Wilson. Teachers keep track of the data, which the ENL teachers use to determine if the students are making appropriate progress toward the successful achievement of specific benchmarks within the academic curriculum. ENL teachers communicate specific ENL considerations for ENL students to help support classroom instruction and necessary modifications. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. This year we will utilize the EDAT tool which will allow us to download 3 ATS (reports and provide us with a summary of our school’s status and students’ achievement and progress. The EDAT also allows schools to target instructional programs to accelerate achievement among both ELLs and non-ELLs. Currently, our NYSESLAT data patterns show that our ELL students continue to show deficits in reading, writing, and listening, with slight improvements in speaking. However, since our students participate in alternate assessment and are required to be administered these standardized assessments, the data is not an accurate reflection of their English language proficiency. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers have combined preps and will meet once a week for a double period in their grade teams. Our ELL teachers meet regularly with the teacher teams to discuss ELL strategies and special considerations for ELL students. With the ENL teacher, they review data, student work, and revise lesson plans that meet students needs. We have also included ELL considerations and strategies in our school’s curriculum maps. Additionally, our ELL team meets bi-weekly in order to debrief and reflect on best practices for our ELLs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 2  Currently, P94M has two certified ENL teachers who provide ENL instruction using a combination of both the integrated co-teaching and standalone models. Students are grouped homogeneously within three contiguous grades. Group sizes also adhere to the student to staff ratio as mandated by the students’ IEP. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? P94M is collocated amongst eight various school sites; however, in an effort to maximize the amount of ENL instruction each student receives, ELLs are grouped into common classes when possible, respecting their IEP classification and student-to-staff ratio, as mandated by their IEP. The ELLs must also fall within three contiguous grade levels in order to be grouped into common classes. As per CR Part 154, all of our ELL students receive a minimum of 150 minutes of ENL instruction each week. Transitioning and expanding students receive the full amount of mandated ENL instructional minutes, while our entering and emerging ELL students receive partial services. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL teachers provide content area instruction in English using both a standalone and integrated model. The ENL teachers work collaboratively with the classroom teachers and related service providers of our ELL students in order to provide a school-wide program of support with an increased focus on scaffolding instruction and employ researched based ENL methodologies such as: modeling, bridging, text-representation, contextualization, schema building, and metacognitive development. In addition, the ENL program incorporates ENL strategies such as TPR (Total Physical Response), CALLA (Cognitive Academic Approach), the Language Experience Approach, the Natural Approach, realia, visuals, and graphic organizers (Venn Diagrams, Story Maps, KWL charts, etc.). Teachers incorporate a multi-sensory approach to learning language, and technology is infused throughout. Content areas are also taught in English with ENL methodologies by Special Education teachers who have completed the mandated 15% of ENL professional development hours. Teachers use the English language to gauge measures of phonological processing, letter knowledge, and text reading. They also provide focused, intensive, small group interventions in addition to exposure to high quality vocabulary throughout the day. Instruction is also aligned to each students’ speech and ELA IEP goals. Teachers are taught “how to” utilize data from formative and summative assessments to modify and intensify the English language development. English Language Arts follows the NYC Balanced Literacy Program and Teachers College Model along with the appropriate language development supports. The ENL program is standards-driven where teachers align their instruction, and make connections, with the NYS Common Core Learning Standards, and appropriate content area standards, scope, and sequence. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students receive a bilingual psycho evaluation during their initial evaluation and once every three years by a bilingual psychologist. If a bilingual psychologist is unavailable, then an interpreter will be provided. For the 14 ELL students who have a bilingual mandate on their IEP, they have been provided with an alternate placement paraprofessional in their classroom who speaks the students’ native language, consistently monitors students’ native languages, and communicates with pedagogues and other school based staff. Bilingual students participating in alternate assessments are assessed in all four modalities utilizing alternative assessments such as: SANDI, and NYSAA in their home language. Baseline data is collected at the onset of the school year. Progress is monitored and measured with NYSAA in mid-winter and again with SANDI in the spring. For the two ELL students participating 3  in standardized assessment, baseline and summative assessments are provided to assess these students in all four modalities throughout the school year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE We utilize the Multilingual Literacy Screener (MLS) SIFE screener from the state. We utilize the principles of UDL (Universal Design for Learning) by providing multiple means of expression, representation, and engagement. SIFE students have access to iPads, computer technology, and glossaries to use for interpretation, translation, and expression. We utilize Boardmaker, realia, and and real life Google images for picture representation. We use You Tube and BrainPop videos to provide or tap into background knowledge and engagement. Pre-teach vocabulary in the new language and the home language. Pair SIFE students up with a more advanced learner for reading and exploring texts in small groups. Utilizing sentence starters, and written assessments with clozed sentences. Utilizing the integrated model, by co-teaching with classroom teachers, and speech educators in order to support sheltered language instruction. b. Newcomer We utilized the Multilingual Literacy Screener (MLS) to aid with SIFE identification and assist with how to differentiate instruction for our newcomer students. We utilize the principles of UDL (Universal Design for Learning) by providing multiple means of expression, representation, and engagement. Newcomer students have access to iPads, computer technology, and glossaries to use for interpretation, translation, and expression. We utilize Boardmaker, and real life Google images for picture representation. We use You Tube and BrainPop videos to provide or tap into background knowledge and engagement. Newcomers engage in hands-on activities (ex. Gardening, cooking, filmmaking, STEM) to develop their Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills through the Natural Approach. Newcomers engage in the arts (singing, acting, music, and art) to develop their Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills through the Natural Approach. c. Developing We utilize targeted interventions and assessments, such as: Wilson/Fundations, SMILE, and Fountas & Pinnel. We also use sentence stems, cloze paragraphs, sentence starters, word banks, and sight word recognition charts. We utilize the principles of UDL (Universal Design for Learning) by providing multiple means of expression, representation, and engagement. Incorporate discussion so that students are encouraged to share their thinking with others and learn multiple perspectives develop metacognition. Developing students have access to iPads, computer technology, and glossaries to use for interpretation, translation, and expression. We utilize Boardmaker, and real life Google images for picture representation. We use YouTube and BrainPop videos to provide or tap into background knowledge and engagement. Developing students engage in hands-on activities (ex. Gardening, cooking, filmmaking, STEM) to develop their Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills through the Natural Approach. Developing students engage in the arts (singing, acting, music, and art) to develop their Basic Interpersonal Communication 4  Skills through the Natural Approach. D. Long Term ELLs We utilize targeted interventions and assessments, such as: Wilson/Fundations, SMILE, and Fountas & Pinnel. We also use sentence stems, cloze paragraphs, sentence starters, word banks, and sight word recognition charts. We utilize the principles of UDL (Universal Design for Learning) by providing multiple means of expression, representation, and engagement. Incorporate discussion so that students are encouraged to share their thinking with others and learn multiple perspectives develop metacognition. Long-term ELLs have access to iPads, computer technology, and glossaries to use for interpretation, translation, and expression. We utilize Boardmaker, and real life Google images for picture representation. We use YouTube and BrainPop videos to provide or tap into background knowledge and engagement. Long term ELLs students engage in hands-on activities (ex. Gardening, cooking, filmmaking, STEM) to develop their Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills through the Natural Approach. Long term ELLs students engage in the arts (singing, acting, music, and art) to develop their Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills through the Natural Approach. Long term ELLs benefit from the use of graphic organizers to break down the writing process so that it is accessible to them. E. Former ELLS up to two years after exiting ELL status Currently, we do not have any former ELLs who have exited their ELL status within the past two years. However, in the event that we did have this subgroup, we would: Collaborate with classroom teachers, and related service providers in order to provide support in areas that the student is demonstrating difficulty in. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Each classroom has also been outfitted with a SMARTBoard that provides a multi-sensory approach for learning language. Our ENL teachers, classroom teachers, and our certified technology teacher provide this service. Our classroom teachers utilize curricular maps that were developed by teams of faculty members to differentiate grade level content that is aligned to the Common Core State Standards and is appropriate for the needs and abilities of the students in our classrooms. The curricular maps include ELL considerations to incorporate into instruction to help provide ELL students with access to the content being taught. ENL teachers also provide assistance for classroom teachers and service providers in teaching and modeling how to integrate effective strategies for ELL students. ELL students, with IEP driven technology-based augmentative communication devices also utilize their devices for at least two 30-minute sessions a week and with their classroom teachers and ENL teachers on a daily basis. For our English Language Learners (ELLs) with Autism, our ENL teachers, 6:1:1 classroom teachers, and speech therapists also immerse our ELLs in left to right work systems that are functional, sensory, and researched-based academic tasks. Our students who are eligible to take the ELA exam are supported with AIS, instructional technology, and dictionaries in the students’ native languages. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All of our ELL students have been classified with a disability and have an IEP which requires them to be in self-contained classrooms in a specialized school within a specialized setting. The school has designed and implements a curriculum aligned to the NYS Common Core Learning Standards and appropriate content area standards, as well as the scope and sequence. The principles of UDL are used to differentiate instruction and provide students access to the content of instruction. ELL strategies have been added to the curriculum, and ENL teachers meet with teacher teams on a regular basis to discuss ELL 5  strategies. The school requires that ENL teachers coordinate their schedules with classroom teachers, and related services providers in order to provide ENL services within the students’ Least Restrictive Environment. In addition, the school has grouped ELL students in common classes, when possible, in order to support an integrated model. When students require stand alone services, ENL teachers must respect the students’ IEP student-to-staff ratios. ENL teachers are also invited to IEP meetings to discuss students’ annual IEP goals and how these goals can be supported using ENL methodology. This way students can continue to improve their English language acquisition while meeting annual IEP goals. English language acquisition is an integral part of the IEP for ELL SWD and ENL teachers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our ELL students in all subgroups receive high quality intensive researched-based instruction in discrete trials, SMILE, Sounds in Motion, and Fundations/Wilson for ELA. Go Math is used for mathematics through both discrete trials and small group instruction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year our 6:1:1 ELL students will receive instruction through a structured teaching approach (TEACCH) which is individualized and makes the content more accessible. TEACCH is an acronym for Treatment and Education of Autistic and Related Communication Handicapped Children. Additionally, we are implementing a new math curriculum, Go Math, and an in-house ELA curriculum. We are also utilizing the Fountas and Pinnell leveled library, instead of Reading A-Z. We will continue with our after-school program; however, with a new theme. It will be named, LETSS (Learning English through Social Studies). The focus will be on the countries of the Eastern Hemisphere in order to support alignment with our middle school social studies curriculum and Common Core Learning Standards. Our ELL students will learn about different countries through their geographical location and cultural staples, while receiving the supplementary English services. We will continue to utilize the principles of UDL (Universal Design for Learning) by providing multiple means of expression, representation, and engagement. The main focus for this year is on engagement. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Currently, we are not discontinuing any of our programs or services for ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Through Title III funding, P94 will offer an after school program as a supplemental language-based instructional program for our ELL population. The program will serve a total of 12 ELL students during the 2018 -2019 school year. P94M’s “Learning English through Science & Sustainability” (LETSS) program will be implemented to support language development, communication skills, as well as both emotional literacy and academic literacy for participating students. The focus will be on the integration of sustainability, and the middle school science curriculum. Our ELL students will learn about the materials that make up the world around us, while receiving their supplementary language services. LETSS , will be implemented to support language development and high academic achievement in ELA in low performing ELL Students. Technology will be incorporated into the instructional program to help ELL students attain English proficiency while meeting New York State Common Core Standards and New Language Progressions. Title III letters are sent home and phone calls are made to parents to inform them of the program. A parent orientation is held to answer any questions they may have, and MetroCards are also provided to families. Additionally, our ELLs at P94M@188 are invited to participate in the Leave it Better program, which is a gardening program that provides children access to a community garden, teaches them how to compost, and also teaches them how to grow their own food. Through this program, ELL students will learn about improving the community while learning the language necessary to retell their gardening experiences in English. ELL students in grades 6-8 are invited to participate in our MSAS (Middle School After-School Program) held our two middle school sites. Notification for participating in the after-school program is sent home in the parents’ preferred language of communication. 6  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Technology, multicultural activities, and multi-sensory ENL materials are used throughout instruction for ELLs. The computer program, Boardmaker, is used to create picture symbols as visuals to assist our ELLs in reading as well as writing. Boardmaker is used in our students home language and in English. Additionally, we use the iPad to deliver instruction through the use of such applications as “Choiceboard Creator,” which is a visual and interactive learning tool that allows us to input our own information and pictures to create interactive activities on the iPad. Classrooms are equipped with reading materials that address the varied needs of all ELL students as well as a fully equipped Resource room with books in many different languages to appeal to our students’ varying interests and reading levels. Each classroom is also outfitted with a SMARTboard. Teachers utilize the Notebook software to create visual and interactive activities on the SMARTboard that our students may access. Students in grades 6-12 also have access to MacBook Airs in order to produce written assignments or to reinforce phonics and math skills through academic reading and math programs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our bilingual students who are receiving ENL services are provided with an alternate placement paraprofessional who speaks their native language and delivers native language support during the entire school day. In addition, our ENL teachers provide verbal native language support, in the language with which they have proficiency or fluency (Spanish), when necessary, to English language learners whose home language is Spanish. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students are grouped homogeneously within three contiguous grades. Group sizes also adhere to the student to staff ratio as mandated by the students’ IEP. Additionally, ELL teachers utilize the principles of UDL with differentiated tasks so that students are afforded access to grade level curriculum. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Technology, multicultural activities, and multi-sensory ENL materials are used throughout instruction for ELLs. The computer program, Boardmaker, is used to create picture symbols as visuals to assist our ELLs in reading as well as writing. Additionally, we use the iPad to deliver instruction through the use of such applications as “Choiceboard Creator,” which is a visual and interactive learning tool that allows us to input our own information and pictures to create interactive activities on the iPad. Classrooms are equipped with reading materials that address the varied needs of all ELL students as well as a fully equipped Resource room with books in many different languages to appeal to our students’ varying interests and reading levels. Each classroom is also outfitted with a SMARTboard. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All newly enrolled ELL students are invited to attend a “meet and greet” informational session as well as a walking tour of the school by the parent coordinator, during our Chapter 683 summer session. In addition, upon arrival into their classroom, new arrivals are paired up with a more proficient buddy to help them acculturate to their new environment. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, we do not offer any language electives to ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. 7  c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Currently, 94M only features the ENL program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? There are two ENL teachers who are currently completing the required professional development. The ENL teachers will continue to attend district and citywide professional development activities related to the instruction of ELLs in order to meet the CR Part 154 regulation requiring that 50% of PD hours for ENL teachers focus on ELL strategies. The ENL teachers will then turnkey the materials to classroom teachers so that continued teaching and learning is in unison with ELL instruction. 15% of PD hours for all other teachers will also focus on ELL strategies, as stated in CR Part 154. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL teachers keep track of which staff members have completed the mandated 15% of total ELL hours of ELL training, including assistant principals, subject area teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, special education teachers, psychologists, occupational therapists, speech therapists, secretaries, and parent coordinators. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ENL teachers have conversations with parents on the phone, in person at a scheduled meeting, and/or at the ENL afterschool program to discuss ENL goals for each child based on IEP goals across the content areas, language development progress based on student work samples, and language proficiency assessment results based on the results of the NYSITELL and/or the previous year’s NYSESLAT. During these meetings, we use the NYCDOE translation and interpretation phone service, if the parent or guardian needs translation into another language. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. During the Educational Planning Conference at the CSE level, options for special education ELLs are discussed with parents. Parent and community involvement is encouraged to enable success and continuity. P94’s administrative office will continue to work in concert with the Parent Coordinator to engage and involve parents and the community by distributing school information and/or correspondence in students’ home languages. Additionally, training will be provided on different aspects of their child’s education in order to effectively gauge parental involvement and participation, and to facilitate the school-home connection, thereby supporting learning, assessments, standards, and the successful achievement of goals. All parents of ELLs are invited to participate in an extracurricular ENL program to provide additional ENL support for their children. During the program, parents can assist students with designing their sustainable schools. Each month, parents are invited to have Coffee with the Cabinet. Here they can learn about program changes, and voice their opinions. Notices go home in the parents’ preferred language. Bilingual staff members are also present in order to provide interpretation throughout the meeting. 8  Throughout the year, there are various art events with Marquis Studios and Arts Connection across our organizational sites that parents and families are invited to attend. Notices are sent home in the parents preferred language for these and all school-wide events. While children are occupied with art activities, workshops are available to the parents. Bilingual staff is present to assist families in their preferred language of communication during these events. Monthly newsletters are sent home in the parents’ preferred language of communication to advise them of upcoming events and activities. The newsletters also provides a list of workshops currently available to families. We also provide a variety of in-house trainings to our parents of ELL students based on their needs. For example, Speech therapists will meet with parents of ELL students in order to train them on how to bet use their augmentative communication devices while at home. Occupational and physical therapists will help parents of ELL students on how to implement a sensory diet. All staff communicates with families in their preferred language of communication. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jeanne Bradley, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P94M School DBN: 75M094 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jeanne Bradley Title Principal Jasmin Maldonado Assistant Principal Halima Butler Parent Coordinator Makini Velazquez/ENL Teacher ENL/Bilingual Teacher Andrea Montalvo Parent Yael Perelis/ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/03/18 10/03/18 10/03/18 10/03/18 10/03/18 10/03/18 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75M094 School Name: P94M Superintendent: KetlerLouissa The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Halima Butler Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess our parents' language needs, at the beginning of the school year, our ENL teachers print out the RPOB in ATS to review the home languages of our students. For new admits that are entering Kindergarten, new to the country, new to the New York City Public School System, or re-entering the New York City Public School System after a hiatus of 2 years, the guidance counselors, in conjunction with the ENL teacher, administer the HLIS in the parents’ native language when available. If it is not available, then the family is provided with a HLIS in English. An interview is conducted to determine the child’s home language. If a staff member who speaks that home language is not available, then we utilize the DOE Language Line. Additionally, NYCDOE language preference questionnaires are completed as part of the intake packet, and parents’ preferred language of communication is listed on all emergency blue cards. Our ENL teachers then turnkey language information to our classroom teachers, and parent coordinator, to ensure that our parents receive written and oral communications in their preferred language of communication. 2  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 1 4 22 0 388 0 0 52 Armenian Bengali Chinese Cantonese English Other: Mandarin Slovak Spanish 0.21 0.86 4.71 0 83.08 0 0 11.13 1 4 16 1 388 4 1 51 0.21 0.86 3.43 0.21 83.08 0.86 0.21 10.92 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English, Spanish, and Chinese. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent-teacher conference announcements, distributed November & March City and state-wide assessments (for our standardized and alternate assessment students ) We utilize: DOE Language Translation/Interpretation Line Parent/community volunteers 3  Bilingual Staff Early January through March NYSESLAT testing notification March Title III eligibility letters (ENL after-school program information Early January DOE Language Translation/Interpretation Line Parent/community volunteers Bilingual Staff DOE Language Translation/Interpretation Line Parent/community volunteers Bilingual Staff DOE Language Translation/Interpretation Line Parent/community volunteers Bilingual Staff DOE Language Translation/Interpretation Line Letters from school/Parent Coordinator/District Information Monthly from September - August Parent/community volunteers Bilingual Staff 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We utilize:  Curriculum Breakfast October DOE Language Translation/Interpretation Line Parent/community volunteers 4  • ENL Parent Orientation October • Title III Orientation • Parent-teacher conferences November November & March DOE Language Translation/Interpretation Line Bilingual Staff DOE Language Translation/Interpretation Line Parent/community volunteers Bilingual Staff Parent/community volunteers Bilingual Staff DOE Language Translation/Interpretation Line Parent/community volunteers Bilingual Staff DOE Language Translation/Interpretation Line  ENL Progress Meetings • Title III Culminating Event January  Coffee with the Cabinet Early May Parent/community volunteers Monthly Bilingual Staff DOE Language Translation/Interpretation Line Parent/community volunteers Bilingual Staff 5  School-Wide Arts Events Various Dates Phone calls to parents as friendly reminders to attend parent workshops and/or parent association meetings- monthly Ongoing IEP Meetings Various dates Parent/community volunteers Bilingual Staff DOE Language Translation/Interpretation Line Parent/community volunteers Bilingual Staff DOE Language Translation/Interpretation Line Parent/community volunteers Bilingual Staff 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We utilize: DOE Language Translation/Interpretation Line Parent/community volunteers Bilingual Staff 6  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We will provide Professional Development for staff members and an ELL orientation for parents. We will share and distribute school wide resources with staff and parents. We will provide staff with a shared document of all compliance documents and resources. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Translation services are offered to parents during Parent Teacher Conferences, school-wide parent meetings, school-related issues, day-to-day communication and school correspondence. The parent coordinator, District 75 Citywide Programs, the Parent Support Office, and the Office of Parent Engagement will continue to conduct and/or offer meaningful workshops for parents. Office of Translation Services provides interpretation services for conferences by calling 1-855-249-9103 or 1-800-231-0288. The ENL teachers have also posted NYCDOE Language Identification Guides in the main office of each of our school's sites to help non-English speaking parents identify and communicate their home language to our school staff who will then call the appropriate translation phone number provided on the Language Identification Guide. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to gather feedback regarding the quality of our services, parent surveys are distributed at the end of our Title III After-school Program, at the end of every parent workshop/orientation and school-wide parent surveys are distributed at the end of March. 7 
