2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 04M096 School Name: P.S. 096 JOSEPH LANZETTA Principal: DAVID PRETTO 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 96 Joseph Lanzetta 310100010000 3K-8 School Number (DBN): 04M096 216 East 120 Street, New York, NY 10035 212-860-5851 212-860-6074 Phone Number: David Pretto Fax: dpretto@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: David Pretto Michael Hawkins Frankie Quinones Michelle Alvarado FeneciaHines Emily Schofield District Information Geographical District: 4 Superintendent’s Office Address: Alexandra Estrella Superintendent: 160 East 120 Street, New York NY 10035 Aestrel3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-348-2873 Phone Number: 212-348-4107 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Avenue, 8 th Floor, New York, NY 10001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) David Pretto Michael Hawkins Frankie Quinones RafaelPerez Fenecia Hines N/A N/A Emily Schofield James Konstantinakos *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Staff Member/ Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) N/A Michelle Martinez Luisenia Veras Erika Cruz Carmen DeLeon Madeline Boreman N/A N/A N/A Member/ Member/ Teacher (SLT Chair) Member/ Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ CBO Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The school vision is "We ACT on our learning to contribute to the global community," with a mission to foster a community that promotes voice and choice, data-driven learning challenges and collaborative problem solving. We are committed to fostering LIONS PRIDE, which translates to Leaders Inspiring Optimism and Nurturing Success through Punctuality, Respect, Innovation, Diligence, and Empathy. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS/MS 96 serves a population of 400 students in grads 3K-8; 199 boys and 201 girls. The attendance percentage for the last two years has been 91%. The school is a Community School and partners with Global Kids, Inc. in the community school model. In addition, the school partners with City Year, Union Settlement, and Harlem YMCA to provide in-school and after-school support. The school partners with Verizon and Digital Promise for a 1:1 iPad program in the middle school, and with Verizon and Project Lead the Way for Maker Education and the development of STEM instruction, including coding and web app design. The school partners with the Second Avenue Subway Project to engage students, families, and staff with access to a long-term partnership centered around raising awareness and connecting the community to the project and all its resources. In 2016-17, PS 96 partnered with National Board for Professional Teaching Standards and the UFT as part of the NT3 grant, to develop the first National Board professional development school in New York City. This includes the development of a UFT Teacher Center staffed by a National Board mentor, who continues to support the infusion of National Board standards in all professional development as well as support a cohort of teachers who will pursue National Board certification this year. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Serving a population with a significant proportion of English Language Learners, PS 96 currently has a Dual Language program in grades K-6 to complement English as a New Language services. PS 96 has a 23% population of Differently Abled Students, a population which has struggled to increase the percentage of students identified as proficient in ELA and Math as measured by the NYS assessments. Students are served in the self-contained, ICT and SETSS settings. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Rigorous Instruction 1.) Areas of Progress  Based upon the Quality Review conducted in December 2017, PS/MS 96 ACT received Proficient ratings in QR indicators 1.1 Curriculum, 1.2 Pedagogy, and 2.2 Assessment. QR Indicator 1.2 Pedagogy was noted as school's Area of Celebration.  Based upon the NYC Learning Environment Survey, PS/MS 96 ACT received percentages of positive responses at or above district and city averages in the survey Rigorous Instruction sub-categories of Academic Press, Common Core Shifts in Literacy, Common Core Shifts in Math, and Course Clarity. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11   On the ELA exams, the school had a 2% increase in proficiency (16% overall) and a 4% decrease in students performing far-below proficiency (40% overall).  On the math exams, the school had a 3% increase in proficiency (14% overall), and a 13% decrease in students performing far below proficiency (51% overall) 2.) Key Areas of Focus  Based upon the NYC Learning Environment Survey, only 34% of teachers responded positively to the statement "Students respond to challenging test questions" and 44% responded positively to "Students respond to challenging questions in class."  PS/MS 96 ACT received only 49% positive responses in the survey Rigorous Instruction sub-category of Quality of Student Discussion, which is 16% below district average and 22% below city average.  Based upon the 2018 June Instructional Reports, PS/MS 96 ACT saw the gap between school and city widen 2% in ELA and 4% in Math despite 9% overall increases in correct answers on both exams.  On the ELA exams, 64% of students with disabilities and 61% of ENL students scored a Level 1, compared to 40% of students scoring Level 1 overall. Only 5% of students with disabilities scored Level 3 or above compared to 16% overall.  On the math exams, 73% of students with disabilities and 81% of ENL students scored Level 1, compared to 51% of students scoring Level 1 overall. Only 2% of students with disabilities scored Level 3, compared to 14% overall. ICT classes in grades 3, 4, and 7 saw gaps of over 20% between city averages in their respective grade level.  Supportive Environment 1.) Areas of Progress  Based upon the Quality Review conducted in December 2017, PS/MS 96 ACT received a Proficient rating in QR indicator 3.4 High Expectations.  2017-18 Supportive Environment Goal: 20% increase, to 75%, of positive responses in the Supportive Environment sub-section Social Emotional: PS/MS 96 ACT saw a 15% increase, to 70% overall, in the number of positive responses in the Social-Emotional section of the Learning Environment survey, which is 7% above the district and city averages.  2017-18 Supportive Environment Goal: 20% increase, to 73%, of positive responses in the Supportive Environment sub-section Classroom Environment: PS/MS 96 ACT saw a 13% increase, to 66% overall, of positive responses in the Classroom Behavior sub-category of the Supportive Environment section of the Learning Environment survey.  PS/MS 96 ACT reduced the number of superintendent suspensions from 29 in 2016-17 to 10 in 2017-18. 2.) Key Areas of Focus Student attendance has been remained at 91% overall for the past two years, despite a goal of 95%.   Chronic absenteeism: 26% chronically absent, 7% severely chronically absent  While PS 96 drastically reduced the superintendent suspensions, classroom removal data still shows that disproportionality exists for black students; this student group has a significantly higher risk factor for the likelihood of disciplinary action. There were 22 classroom removals of black students, which comprise 27% of the school population, and 15 classroom removals of Hispanic students, which comprise 70% of the student population.  Based upon the Quality Review conducted in December 2017, PS/MS 96 ACT received a Developing rating in QR indicator 1.4 Positive Learning Environment.  The Social Emotional sub-section 70% positive response rate is 9% below district average and 12% below city average. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12   The Preventing Bullying sub-section 53% positive response rate is 7% below district average and 10% below city average. Collaborative Teachers 1.) Areas of Progress Based upon the Quality Review conducted in December 2017, PS/MS 96 ACT received Proficient rating in QR indicator 4.1 Teacher Support and Supervision.  Based upon the NYC Learning Environment Survey, PS/MS 96 ACT received percentages of positive responses above district and city averages in the survey Collaborative Teachers sub-sections Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction, and Peer Collaboration. 2.) Key Areas of Focus  Based upon the Quality Review conducted in December 2017, PS/MS 96 ACT received a Developing rating in QR indicator 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development.  The Innovation and Collective Responsibility sub-section 62% positive response rate is 14% below district average and 17% below city average.  The Quality of Professional Development sub-section 64% positive response rate is 9% below district average and 14% below city average.  The School Commitment sub-section 68% positive response rate is 7% below district average and 13% below city average. Effective School Leadership 1.) Areas of Progress Based upon the Quality Review conducted in December 2017, PS/MS 96 ACT received Proficient ratings in QR indicators 1.1 Curriculum, 1.2 Pedagogy, 2.2 Assessment, 3.4 High Expectations, 1.3 Leveraging Resources, 3.1 Goals and Action Plans, 4.1 Teacher Support and Supervision, and 5.1 Monitoring and Revising Systems. QR Indicator 1.2 Pedagogy was noted as school's Area of Celebration. Based upon the NYC Learning Environment Survey, PS/MS 96 ACT received percentages of positive responses at or near district and city averages in the survey Effective School Leadership sub-sections Inclusive Leadership and Instructional Leadership. 2.) Key Areas of Focus Based upon the Quality Review conducted in December 2017, PS/MS 96 ACT received a Developing rating in QR indicator 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development. The Program Coherence sub-section 67% positive response rate is 7% below district average and 15% below city average. The Teacher Influence sub-section 63% positive response rate is 13% below district average and 14% below city average. Strong Family-Community Ties 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  1.) Areas of Progress  Based upon the Quality Review conducted in December 2017, PS/MS 96 ACT received Proficient rating in QR indicator 3.4 High Expectations. 2.) Key Areas of Focus Student attendance has been remained at 91% overall for the past two years, despite a goal of 95%.   Chronic absenteeism: 26% chronically absent, 7% severely chronically absent (122 total students)  The Outreach to Parents sub-section 5% positive response rate is 7% below district average and 8% below city average: 63% of teachers say that families are offered opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child.  The Parent Involvement in School sub-section 81% positive response rate is 6% below district average and 8% below city average: 52% of families say that the have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 04M096 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 397 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 42 41 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 30 31 25 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 94.0% % Attendance Rate 92.2% % Reduced Lunch 20.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 68.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.25 0% 24% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 15.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 56% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 61 59 90.6% 0.8% 31.0% 25.4% 2.3% 1.3% 2 11% 8 13.7% 1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1.) Areas of Progress  Based upon the Quality Review conducted in December 2017, PS/MS 96 ACT received Proficient ratings in QR indicators 1.1 Curriculum, 1.2 Pedagogy, and 2.2 Assessment. QR Indicator 1.2 Pedagogy was noted as school's Area of Celebration.  Based upon the NYC Learning Environment Survey, PS/MS 96 ACT received percentages of positive responses at or above district and city averages in the survey Rigorous Instruction sub-categories of Academic Press, Common Core Shifts in Literacy, Common Core Shifts in Math, and Course Clarity.  Based upon the 2018 June Instructional Reports, PS/MS 96 ACT students saw a 9% increase of overall correct responses on both the NYS ELA and Math exams.  On the ELA exams, the 3rd grade had a 4% overall increase, and closed the gap between school and city by 2%. The 5th grade had an 11% increase, and closed the gap between school and city by 6%. The 6th grade had a 6% increase, and closed the gap between school and city by 4%.  On the math exams, the 5th grade had a 1% increase. The 6th grade had a 4% increase, and closed the gap between school and city by 6%. The 7th grade had an 11% increase, and closed the gap between city and school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  by 4%. The 8th grade had a 13% increase, and closed the gap between school and city by 6%. One 8th grade class performed overall at city average. 2.) Key Areas of Focus  Based upon the NYC Learning Environment Survey, only 34% of teachers responded positively to the statement "Students respond to challenging test questions" and 44% responded positively to "Students respond to challenging questions in class."  PS/MS 96 ACT received only 49% positive responses in the survey Rigorous Instruction sub-category of Quality of Student Discussion, which is 16% below district average and 22% below city average.  Based upon the 2018 June Instructional Reports, PS/MS 96 ACT saw the gap between school and city widen 2% in ELA and 4% in Math despite 9% overall increases in correct answers on both exams.  On the ELA exams, the 4th grade had an 8% decrease, and widened the gap between school and city by 15%. The 7th grade had no change, and widened the gap between school and city by 1%. The 8th grade had a 4% decrease, and widened the gap between school and city by 4%. ICT classes in grades 4, 7, and 8 saw gaps of over 20% between city averages in their respective grade level.  On the math exams, the 3rd grade had a 6% decrease, and widened the gap between school and city by 6%. The 4th grade had a 14% decrease, and widened the gap between school and city by 14%. ICT classes in grades 3, 4, and 7 saw gaps of over 20% between city averages in their respective grade level.  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase in proficiency levels of at least 20% on NYS ELA and Math assessments by students in grades 4-8 identified as differently-abled who are currently not meeting standards, as measured by 2018 state assessments. In ELA, this is a target of 25% proficiency in ELA and 22% proficiency in Math for the Student With Disabilities subgroup. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) SOP 3.2: Instructional Focus of Incorporating High-Utility Vocabulary in Academic Discourse and Writing: Academic Conversations Book Study series: CH. 2-4, 6-8 All Students September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Cabinet Grade Level Teams Grade Team Inter-Disciplinary Unit Reflections using Leader's Tool 6.1 as shared protocol SOP 3.3: DDI Protoocols: School-wide grading policy include Rally interim assessments as final exams and ELA/Math Performance Series Lexile levels as mid-term checks. Grade Teams employ Bambrick-Santoyo interim assessment cycle of assessment and six-week plans to address needs of DAS as focus of inquiry. Differently-Abled Students Grades 4-8 September 2018- June 2019 SOP 3.4: Inter-Disciplinary Planning: K-8 School curriculum materials aligned in ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science and Monday PL time allocated to facilitate development of grade-wide interdisciplinary units of study. School partnership with Second Avenue Subway Project used as shared platform for inter-disciplinary project development. All K-8 Teacher Teams September 2018-June 2019 SOP 3.5: Formative and Summative Assessments: School-wide grading policy include Rally interim assessments as final exams and ELA/Math Performance Series Lexile levels as mid-term checks. Teachers and Students employ Bambrick-Santoyo interim assessment cycle, including six-week plans and student reflections. City Year and Global Kids staff conduct F&P LLI groups in grades 3-8 based on reading level data. September 2018 - June 2019 Differently-Abled Students Grades 4-8 Students reading far below benchmarks grades 3-8 NTN math consultant Assessment Committee Grade Level Teams Instructional Cabinet Grade Teams NTN consultant Assessment Committee RTI Team Grade Level Teams City Year Team Leader Community School Director 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School administration and teachers will present curricular overview during September 13th Open School Night. Parent coordinator will work with assessment team to schedule and facilitate parent workshops for all students during first trimester, and for targeted students after November, February, and June benchmark assessments. Pupil Path and Skedula system used to communicate student progress to students and families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Contract for Excellence and Title I Focus funds will be allocated to procure NTN math consultant services. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Students will take the Rally ELA and Math Interim Assessments in November 2018, February 2019, April 2019 and June 2019 to assess progress towards the goal of 20% growth in proficiency levels, and teacher teams will identify individualized plans for all students using the Bambrick-Santoyo six-week instructional plan model. Students performing below grade level will take ELA and Math Performance Series online assessments to monitor progress as mid-term checks in October, December, February and April. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Interim Assessment Results will be logged in iO Assessment and compared to previous results. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1.) Areas of Progress  Based upon the Quality Review conducted in December 2017, PS/MS 96 ACT received a Proficient rating in QR indicator 3.4 High Expectations.  2017-18 Supportive Environment Goal: 20% increase, to 75%, of positive responses in the Supportive Environment sub-section Social Emotional: PS/MS 96 ACT saw a 15% increase, to 70% overall, in the number of positive responses in the Social-Emotional section of the Learning Environment survey, which is 7% above the district and city averages.  2017-18 Supportive Environment Goal: 20% increase, to 73%, of positive responses in the Supportive Environment sub-section Classroom Environment: PS/MS 96 ACT saw a 13% increase, to 66% overall, of positive responses in the Classroom Behavior sub-category of the Supportive Environment section of the Learning Environment survey.  PS/MS 96 ACT reduced the number of superintendent suspensions from 29 in 2016-17 to 10 in 2017-18. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  2.) Key Areas of Focus Student attendance has been remained at 91% overall for the past two years, despite a goal of 95%.   Chronic absenteeism: 26% chronically absent, 7% severely chronically absent (122 total students)  While PS 96 drastically reduced the superintendent suspensions, classroom removal data still shows that disproportionality exists for black students; this student group has a significantly higher risk ratio for the likelihood of disciplinary action. There were 22 classroom removals of black students, which comprise 27% of the school population, and 15 classroom removals of Hispanic students, which comprise 70% of the student population.  Based upon the Quality Review conducted in December 2017, PS/MS 96 ACT received a Developing rating in QR indicator 1.4 Positive Learning Environment.  The Social Emotional sub-section 70% positive response rate is 9% below district average and 12% below city average.  The Preventing Bullying sub-section 53% positive response rate is 7% below district average and 10% below city average. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 20% increase in positive responses from students in the Social Emotional and Preventing Bullying sub-sections of the Supportive Environment section of the 2019 Learning Environment survey, as evidenced by an increase from 70% to 90% in the Social Emotional section and from 53% to 73% in the Preventing Bullying section. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implement Year Two of K-8 advisory curriculum, using The Leader in Me (TLIM) framework and the Seven Habits as foundation. All staff will engage in three full days of training in the Seven Habits and paradigm focus of TLIM. PBIS incentives will be connected to the Seven Habits, and monthly assemblies and rewards will reinforce and highlight each habit. PBIS credits and debits will be recorded in Pupil Path and used to determine participation in PBIS rewards. All teaching staff engage in professional development cycles in The Leader in Me Advisory curriculum, RULER Mood Meter and Vocabulary Development, and Courageous Conversations Protocol. Student handbook is aligned to parent handbook, and includes school-wide behavior framework with clear discipline procedures for Level One classroom, uniform, and attendance infractions, including reporting in Pupil Path. SAVE room protocol for reflection, removal, and re-entry is tied to Seven Habits counseling from Dean of School Culture and Community Coordinator. Pupil Path system will be used to monitor student credit/debit system, and monitor behavior referrals. School Culture team will administer four surveys throughout the year through Google Forms to monitor impact of advisory curriculum and PBIS connections. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All students September 2018 - June 2019 Dean of School Culture Community School Director Lighthouse Team City Year Team Franklin Covey consultants All teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, teachers, City Year team All students September 2018-June 2019 Administration Dean Community Coordinator Parent Coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  All families will be provided with resources on understanding the Seven Habits during the September 13th Open School Night by parent coordinator and dean. Families will maintain two-way communication through Jupiter Grades, and use Parent Handbook as general resource for family engagement activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers utilize 40 parent engagement time to update online systems for communication through Pupil Path and school website. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will have achieved 10% increase of positive responses in internal school surveys on social emotional learning and preventing bullying, as evidenced by an increase from 55% to 65% and 53%to 63% respectively. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Pupil Path, Google Form surveys and OORS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed x x x using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1.) Areas of Progress Based upon the Quality Review conducted in December 2017, PS/MS 96 ACT received Proficient rating in QR indicator 4.1 Teacher Support and Supervision.  Based upon the NYC Learning Environment Survey, PS/MS 96 ACT received percentages of positive responses above district and city averages in the survey Collaborative Teachers sub-sections Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction, and Peer Collaboration. 2.) Key Areas of Focus  Based upon the Quality Review conducted in December 2017, PS/MS 96 ACT received a Developing rating in QR indicator 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development.  The Innovation and Collective Responsibility sub-section 62% positive response rate is 14% below district average and 17% below city average.  The Quality of Professional Development sub-section 64% positive response rate is 9% below district average and 14% below city average. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25   The School Commitment sub-section 68% positive response rate is 7% below district average and 13% below city average. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 96 will see an increase of 20% of positive responses on the Learning Environment survey in the sub-categories Innovation and Collective Responsibility, Quality of Professional Development, and School Commitment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). K-8 Teacher teams are scheduled to meet at least once weekly and preparation periods are aligned during multiple points weekly (TBD); Teacher Center coach supports teacher team inquiry in Advanced Literacies Hallmarks and aligns inquiry process to Five Core Propositions and NB Architecture for Effective Teaching during weekly meetings and Monday PL. Teacher Teams use Google Drive to post and revise inter-disciplinary curriculum maps, unit plans. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) K-8 Teacher Teams September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, administrators School leaders conduct instructional walk-throughs using Advanced Literacies Leader's Tool 5.1. Instructional Cabinet All teachers All teachers engage in structured book study of the text Academic Conversations by Jeff Zwiers, with a focus on incorporating structures that support the school-wide instructional focus. Teacher PLCs aligned to school-wide initiatives engage in professional learning structures that support staff capacity building and distributive leadership; initiatives include Second Avenue Subway Project partnership, Leader in Me Lighthouse Team, and Equity Team. All teachers All teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, administrators, consultants Instructional Cabinet Principal PLC Leads SASP Team TLIM Coach OOL Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. All families will be provided with resources on understanding the Seven Habits during the September 13th Open School Night by parent coordinator and dean. Families will maintain two-way communication through Pupil Path, and use Parent Handbook as general resource for family engagement activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session funds will be utilized to support survey drafting and analysis. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. School leaders will analyze survey results from staff surveys to monitor progress in refinement of NB culture development. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance data, internal survey data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1.) Areas of Progress Based upon the Quality Review conducted in December 2017, PS/MS 96 ACT received Proficient ratings in QR indicators 1.1 Curriculum, 1.2 Pedagogy, 2.2 Assessment, 3.4 High Expectations, 1.3 Leveraging Resources, 3.1 Goals and Action Plans, 4.1 Teacher Support and Supervision, and 5.1 Monitoring and Revising Systems. QR Indicator 1.2 Pedagogy was noted as school's Area of Celebration. Based upon the NYC Learning Environment Survey, PS/MS 96 ACT received percentages of positive responses at or near district and city averages in the survey Effective School Leadership sub-sections Inclusive Leadership and Instructional Leadership. 2.) Key Areas of Focus 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Based upon the Quality Review conducted in December 2017, PS/MS 96 ACT received a Developing rating in QR indicator 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development. The Program Coherence sub-section 67% positive response rate is 7% below district average and 15% below city average. The Teacher Influence sub-section 63% positive response rate is 13% below district average and 14% below city average. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 20% increase of positive responses in the Learning Environment sub-sections of Program Coherence, Collective Responsibility, and Teacher Influence, to 87%, 70% and 83% respectively. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher teams are organized and schedule by grade level in K-6, vertical team in 3K, 4K, and content teams in grades 7-8. Weekly meeting agendas are aligned to National Board for Professional Teaching Standards Architecture for Accomplished Teaching. Teachers implement school-wide protocols for interim assessment data analysis, curriculum planning, looking at student work, reflection, and goal-setting. Teams are supported by National Board Teacher Center coach, principal and AP. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 3K-8 teacher teams September 2018-June 2019 Principal, AP Teacher Center Monday Professional Development is aligned to school and district priorities DDI, Social-Emotional Learning, and Equity through vertical teams and grade-level team alignment. Teams meet six times during the year on Mondays to form action plan and implement the action plan in each grade level through the grade team representative. RULER training is implemented through six meetings this year on Mondays. Teachers engaged in differentiated professional learning opportunities September 2018-June 2019 Principal, AP, Professional Development Committee DDI protocols for analyzing student progress on interim assessments is aligned to weekly teacher team meetings and student marking period system for grades K-8, and organized using Bambrick-Santoyo model for interim assessment. Teachers engage in reflection and curriculum refinement as a part of each cycle of assessment analysis. Instructional Cabinet is comprised of teacher leaders from each grade band, representing special education, dual language, ENL, arts and technology, in order to support the implementation of school-wide instructional focus, instructional priorities, and the Hallmarks of Advanced Literacies. All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, AP, Model Teacher, UFT TC coach, reading, writing, assessment, and math consultants Selected teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal AP Instructional Cabinet 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The findings of the instructional cabinet will be shared with parent leaders on the SLT during monthly meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Cabinet will meet during the Tuesday OPW time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. SLT will analyze Hallmarks checklist data to determine level of implementation and necessary next steps for professional development. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Hallmarks of Advanced Literacies Leader's Tools 4.1 and 6.1 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1.) Areas of Progress  Based upon the Quality Review conducted in December 2017, PS/MS 96 ACT received Proficient rating in QR indicator 3.4 High Expectations. 2.) Key Areas of Focus Student attendance has remained at 91% overall for the past two years, despite a goal of 95%.   Chronic absenteeism: 26% chronically absent, 7% severely chronically absent  The Outreach to Parents sub-section 5% positive response rate is 7% below district average and 8% below city average: 63% of teachers say that families are offered opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child.  The Parent Involvement in School sub-section 81% positive response rate is 6% below district average and 8% below city average: 52% of families say that the have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, overall student attendance will average 95% for the year, as measured by the ATS RYMA report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Regular communication with parents via monthly school calendars, Parent Newsletters, website updates, surveys, flyers, emails, and Pupil Path via principal, parent coordinator, and teachers; teachers use Parent Engagement Tuesday time to contact no less than three families with positive news about their child. Provide workshops and activities to parents that are relevant to their child’s learning and engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All families September2018-June2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator, teachers Attendance team: weekly meeting comprised of support staff to target and track students in at-risk and chronically absent status. Develop action plans for individual students. Team utilizes New Visions Data Sorter to track student attendance and student support interventions. At-risk and chronically absent students September 2018-June 2019 Student and parent incentives for perfect and improved attendance K-8 students September 2018- June 2019 Parent Association Executive Board, Global kids, and City Year collaborate on student achievement celebrations to conduct during Parent Association meetings. All families November 2018 - June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, City Year, Community School Director, Attendance Teacher Community School Director, Parent Coordinator, City Year Team Leader Parent Association, City Year, school leaders If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Global Kids, Inc City Year of New York Harlem YMCA Union Settlement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  New York Foundling Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Community Schools partner Global Kids, City Year, NY Foundling, and attendance teacher will support attendance team initiatives, and Title I funds for STH wil support this group of students in attendance initiatives. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Attendance team will meet weekly to monitor attendance rates and targeted student groups. New Visions Data Sorter will be used to determine overall attendance data, including the determination of whether overall attendance meets the 95% goal during each month and in February as the mid-point benchmark. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS attendance reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students performing below grade level according to F&P and online assessments Students performing in the lowest third in Rally Interim Assessments Science Teacher referral to RTI Team Social Studies Teacher referral to RTI Team Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) iReady ELA, MyON Reader, Great Leaps, Fountas and PinnellLeveled Literacy Intervention system, Words Their Way, Fundations, Recipe for Reading iReady Math, , Great Leaps, Go-Math, Connected Math 3 for Middle School, , City Year Personnel , use of manipulatives, Skill and strategy instruction based on data, small group instruction, peer tutoring, KEMS Skill and strategy instruction based on data, and non-fiction book clubs, differentiated text sets Skill and strategy instruction based on data, and non-fiction book clubs, differentiated text sets Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one-to-one, and tutoring During the school day, after school, Small group, one-to-one, and tutoring During the school day, after school, Small group, one-to-one, and tutoring During the school day, after school, Small group, one-to-one, and tutoring During the school day, after school, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37 Small group, one-to-one, and large group During the school day, after school, At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher referral to guidance department Crisis intervention, at risk- counseling, conflict resolution, strategies, self-esteem and self- confidence building, study skills, leadership development, civic engagement, and high school articulation, Asthma-related workshops, peer mentoring, 50 Acts Program 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Ten students are currently attending our school who live in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Guidance counselor and Social Worker will work directly with students and families to identify needs and connect to resources. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The school has a hiring committee composed of the UFT representative and general and special education teachers and the administration. Prospect candidates are interviewed and possibly invited for a demonstration lesson. Pre-service professional development is provided around behavior management and instruction. Professional development via school-based staff and consultants is provided to new teachers as well as all teachers via DOE and the school. The school utilizes DOE HR systems (New Teacher Finer, ESSS) and forms partnerships with universities (Hunter College) and alternative certification programs (Teach for America, NYC Teaching Fellows) to ensure that all teachers are appropriately licensed and highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Administration and teachers will participate in professional development and job-embedded work around the Framework for Teaching and developing a common language for teaching. Professional development throughout around Common Core Learning Standards, new ELA and math curricula, learning targets, formative assessments, questioning and discussion. Paras, student teachers, and City Year staff have been trained on Great Leaps, small group instruction and asking effective questions. Lead Paraprofessionals engage in professional development which is then turn-keyed to their colleagues. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Local day cares are invited to our pre-kindergarten and kindergarten open houses and early childhood activities. Social worker, guidance counselor, and teacher provide parents with preparing for kindergarten workshops ,and students make visitations to kindergarten in spring. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) committee was formed to look at assessment practices from 2017-18 school year and decide on which assessments best meet the needs of our students. Teachers are selected to reflect the different grade bands and subject areas represented in the school. School leaders provided professional development school wide in 2017-18 in the use of interim assessment data to formulate instructional plans for targeted groups of students, and in 2017-18 have further embedded assessment PD by partnering with Assessment Matters and National Training Network. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 282,961.00 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42 Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 16,979.00 118,499.00 39,886.00 11,316.00 0 2,580,375.00 x x x x x 5a, 5b, 5c 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e N/A 5a, 5c, 5e 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 96 Joseph Lanzetta , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 96 Joseph Lanzetta will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., /State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template PS 96 Joseph Lanzetta , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards and Assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. ● Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? As a result of the merger, PS 96 became a Community School, and now partners with Global Kids, Inc. to implement the services and supports related to physical, social, and mental health, attendance, parent engagement, and enrichment programming. This partnership includes a New York Foundling satellite mental health clinic, a partnership with Codesters to teach computer coding in grades 5-7 as well as technology instruction in grades 2-4, and parent engagement activities including arts workshops through Doing Art Together and family access to cultural institutions through Cool Culture. In 2017-18, PS 96 ACT and Global Kids will expand its social-emotional programming through a subcontract with Franklin Covey and the Leader in Me school reform model. This includes professional development for teachers, K-8 advisory instruction using the Seven Habits framework. PS 96 features an Attendance Team that meets weekly , developing support plans for chronically absent students. The school leaders have re-formed partnerships with PS 96 families over the past two years, and have implemented policies and systems to guide family partnerships to a focus on academic achievement, including a parent protocol and a parent handbook. The formation of the attendance team supports student achievement and strong family partnerships through communicating high expectations and connecting families with resources. As a result, this school year is filled with exciting opportunities including computer programming systems lessons for 5th and 6th 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  graders, personalized swimming lessons at Asphalt Green for 2nd graders and healthy workshop series provided from our local health center, Boriken, as well as an onsite food pantry. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2018, the severally chronically list will be reduced by 75% by identifying in the first two weeks of school students who ended the previous school year with an average yearly attendance of 80% or less. The families will be asked to come in for an individual meeting in order to create a collective action plan for their student’s attendance. These meetings will all take place by October 2018. By June 2018, overall student attendance will average 95% for the year. This goal will be supported by regular communication with parents via monthly school calendars, Coffee With the Principal, Parent Newsletters, website updates, surveys, flyers, emails, and School Messenger via principal, parent coordinator, and teachers; teachers use Parent Engagement Tuesday time to contact no less than three families with positive news about their child. Provide workshops and activities to parents that are relevant to their child’s learning and engagement. Attendance team will meet weekly to monitor attendance rates and targeted student groups. New Visions Data Sorter will be used to determine overall attendance data, including the determination of whether overall attendance meets the 95% goal during each month and in February as the mid-point benchmark. By June 2018, there will be a 20% increase in positive responses from students in the Social Emotional and Safety sections of the DOE Learning Environment survey. This will be supported by implement Year One of K-8 advisory curriculum, using The Leader in Me (TLIM) framework and the Seven Habits as foundation. PBIS incentives will be connected to the Seven Habits, and monthly assemblies and rewards will reinforce and highlight each habit. All staff will engage in three full days of training in the Seven Habits and paradigm focus of TLIM. Jupiter Grades system will be used to monitor student credit/debit system, and monitor behavior referrals. School Culture team will administer four surveys throughout the year through Google Forms to monitor impact of advisory curriculum and PBIS connections. All teaching staff will engage in professional development cycles in Therapeutic Crisis Interventions and Supports (TCIS) and Courageous Conversations Protocol. Student handbook is aligned to parent handbook, and includes school-wide behavior framework with clear discipline procedures for Level One classroom, uniform, and attendance infractions, including reporting in Jupiter Grades. SAVE room protocol for reflection, removal, and re-entry is tied to Seven Habits counseling from Dean of School Culture and Community Coordinator. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? By increasing communication with families and students to allow them to be the most informed and engaged as possible, families and students will be able to fully take advantage of the resources available and be more present. Increasing engagement and attendance from students will prepare them better to learn which will support the academic goals. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership ELT/ School Day Academic Support Target Population Whole School Scope of Service SY17-18 SMART Goal Incoming 6th Grade Orientation, Digital Learning and Leadership (DLL), Leadership, Boys Group and Girl's Group During the week of August 28th, incoming 6th graders will participate in an orientation session to introduce them to the school, participate in team building and set norms for the year. By June 2018, DLL trainer will create and implement a year - long digital learning curriculum focused on digital citizenship, financial literacy and citywide project with Link NYC. By June 2018, Global Kids trainer will create and implement a year - long curriculum focused on leadership development, global affairs and service learning projects. Global Kids will support a minimum of one school-wide cultural event per month. Global Kids will also support overall school culture initiatives including, college access awareness and corporate days of services. School Culture Whole School School-wide cultural events and efforts to increase overall school culture. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Attendance Supports Whole School Daily Attendance Check-in and Monthly Attendance Challenges Family Engagement All Families Monthly Family Events Daily phone calls will be conducted to absent students. Data sorter will be frequently monitored to identify students at risk and students who should be highlighted due to improvements. Creative challenges will be promoted and incentives in order to encourage high attendance Once a month there will be a family event that supports the monthly team identified on the school culture calendar. Event will engage a minimum of 5% of schools' families. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will leverage the attendance team and the Community Schools Team, which consist of members from PS 96 DOE staff and partner CBO staff. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  2. 3. 4. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Director (CSD) will be a member of the weekly SLT meetings, cabinet meeting and school culture committee. CSD will lead monthly community school team meetings to support overall school initiatives. CSD will oversee and lead school-wide attendance work in collaboration with school attendance meeting. CSD will also coordinate additional services and resources in the school and community in order to best support the families. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. CSD will focus on supporting and equipping teachers with up to date attendance data in order to have them lead in class attendance interventions. CSD will also focus on bringing together the numerous resources and CBOs in the building, including City Year, Union Settlement and YMCA, to collectively support the school-wide school climate calendar and distribute resources adequately. 2.The CSD will host initial meet and greet meeting in order to share additional information on the Community School Model and the Community School Team. Families will be invited via phone calls, letters and emails. Teachers will be contacted in person during school-wide PD's, attendance meetings and additional school-wide gatherings. Community members will receive information via email including details on the P.S. 96, Community School Model and Community School Team. 3. The data sorter will be used to connect students to the appropriate intervention, recordthe intervention and monitor the impact of the intervention on attendance. The data sorter will be used during attendance meetings and CSD’s interactions with various stakeholders. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Collaboration with the guidance team, support staff, and other CBO organizations. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. July 2018 - June 2019 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: PS/MS 96 has a total of 402 students in grades 3K through 8th grade; of that number, 104 students (23%) are identified ELLs, including those who are identified as Commanding former Multi-Lingual Learners/English Language Learners (MLL/ELL) entitled to transitional English as a New Language (ENL) services. The school has a Dual Language (DL) program spanning grades K to Grade 4. Students in grades 5-8 only receive ENL services. Although there is a strong need to have academic intervention services for many of our ELL students, the Title III supplementary program will be used to provide our middle school students receiving ENL in grades 5-8 additional support after school. Data from the 2018 NYSESLAT and NYS ELA assessment, indicate that our ENL students in grades 5-8 need extra instructional support across all areas, however, the need is greatest in writing. Based on this observation, we have selected using the Rewards Literacy Intervention program, which will be purchased with Title III program. The Rewards Literacy Intervention program targets students in grades 4-12, and specifies support to MLL/ELLs. It includes an assessment program for screening, progress monitoring and assessing outcomes. There is also comprehensive professional development for training and supporting teachers using the program. Title III funds will be used to fund this professional development for teachers working in the Title III program only. This program is implemented systematically, and provides for explicit instruction that addresses academic language, including vocabulary, sentence length and content area specific, discursive aspects. It is described as capable of producing long-term growth during a short period of time. It is designed as a gradual-release of responsibility model, which matches the approach taken to literacy in PS/MS 96 for writing instruction. The program will be offered on two afternoons a week, on Wednesdays and Thursdays, for two hours each afternoon. Instruction will be provided by two ENL teachers and 1 additional, bilingual-certified, service provider. Based on the academic and language proficiency needs of the students, they will be strategically placed in small groups. Specific Data: According to EDAT data, there are 40 MLL/ELL students in grades 5-8, who are in need of intervention after school. They speak 4 different languages: 1) Spanish, 30 students (78%); 2) Arabic, 6 students (13%) 3) French, 3 students (7%) and 4) Wolof, 1 student (2%). Of these, 32 students (71%) are classified as "at risk" at level 3 and above. Of the 45 students, 27 students (60%) are classified at the "at-risk" category 5 and above. All of the students (100%) score lowest on the NYSESLAT in the writing modality. Of the 45 total MLL/ELL grade 5-8 students, 32 students took the ELA. All attained either a 1 or a 2 score on that exam. Those who received a score of 1 were 27 of the 32 students (84%), and those who received a score of 2 comprised the remaining 5 students (16%). None attained a score of 3 or 4. Students range in 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information age between 10 and 14 years old. Twelve (27%) have diverse, identified special needs. Fourteen out of the 45 total MLL/ELLs (31%) are Long Term ELLs (LTELLs). Seven of the 40 students (27%) are Developing MLL/ELLs. The remaining nineteen (42%) are Newcomers. Based on the above data, the teachers targeted for the program are two who speak Spanish and one who is multilingual. After training, the ENL/Bilingual teachers will be able to adapt lessons provided by the program, according to the program's systematic approach. These lessons will be explicit, scaffolded, rigorous, and engaging. Differentiation will include grouping for instruction so that students may work at their own pace and level of ability, and address specific areas with teacher support, peer support, or independently. Title II After School Program - School Day Connection The ENL teacher and the ELA teacher who provide instruction to the students during the school day, will communicate with each other regarding information on student progress from the Title III after-school program, so that they can also track the progress of the students. By examining data from the NYSESLAT, the NYS ELA assessment, the Rewards program assessment tools, combined with data from writing rubrics for both writing craft and English language development, as well as writing conference notes, teachers working with the students during the school day will be able to harness the support and enhance it's effectiveness for the students. Working with the ENL students in grades 5-8, the ENL and ELA teachers will provide specific writing instruction to the MLL/ELL students, that responds to the needs identified after school, as well as those identified by assessment protocols during the day. Title III Program Description: At school dismissal, 2:20pm, students will report to the school cafeteria and be provided with refreshments from another school funding source. Bilingual-certified and ENL-certified Teachers will pick student groups up at 2:30pm, to take them to their classrooms for lessons. Writing lessons will be provided in 20 to 30-minute segments, as per the program design. On a given afternoon, there is potential to provide 3-4 lessons. Students will be dismissed at 4:30. Given the potential for 3-4 lessons each afternoon, the program will need to be implemented for 12-14 weeks in order to complete the 75 total lessons offered by the program, therefore the program is planned to be implemented for 15 weeks. The additional week will account for the possibility for cancellations due to inevitable circumstances, such as inclement weather. Budget Description 7,400: Per session for three teachers to provide instruction for 66 hours, attend one 2-hour PD by company, and 1 teacher to provide 3 parent workshops. 934.86: For Rewards program package including in-person training and online access to on-going training and resources. 1595.85: Rewards Writing 5-12 Intervention Program, 3 Complete Kits 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional development will be provided for the Rewards Literacy Intervention program with a focus on the ELL students' writing development to the following teachers: Two ENL and one DL teacher. Teachers will learn about the program design, about development of writing in a new language, about academic language, and how the program it implemented and assessed. The teachers working in the program will meet weekly to review and plan the week's activities and lessons. They will also collaborate on assessing and tracking the students' learning, communicating with the students' parents, and in providing a report of progress and next steps to the teachers who provide instruction to these students during the day. Professional development for the ENL and DL teachers will be ongoing. Scheduled will be a series of trainings provided by the program, with online supplemental support, as well as links within professional learning scheduled during the regular, contractual professional development on Mondays and Tuesdays. The ESOL and DL certified teachers will focus on methods of developing language for academic writing across disciplines. The duration of each session will be 45 minutes. The goal is to support teachers to apply their learning about methods to provide instruction in academic writing to middle school aged students, to implement the Title III program with fidelity, to ensure student growth. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent engagement will be provided by the ENL or DL teachers. It will be ongoing throughout the duration of the Title III program and take place after school. The parent sessions will be 45 minutes in duration. These sessions will take place after the 5th, 10th and 15th week of the program. They will begin after a Thursday session is finished for the day. To support those parents who need translation services in their home language(s), because they speak languages other than those of the teacher, a translator who speaks the needed language(s) will be provided during workshops, as needed. Handouts distributed will also be provided in the parents' native language(s). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Parent notices will be sent home informing families of the days and times of the workshops in the languages of the families. When collecting responses about intent to attend the workshops, language data will also be included to plan for translation needs. Topics that will be covered will be 1) What can I do to help my child improve his or her writing in English? In this workshop, the teacher will explain how they are using the program to develop academic writing abilities so that parents will be able to visualize what happens in the intervention program and support the instruction at home. The teacher will also make suggestions about how parents can converse with their children about their child's writing progress and activities, to develop a supportive dialogue and monitoring system at home, to support and encourage their children in this learning. 2) What assessments will my child be required to take this year, and what are their purposes? In this workshop, the teacher will list and describe the different assessments MLL/ELLs take, when they take them, and what their purposes are. They will provide information about accommodations provided to the MLL/ELL students and for what reasons. 3) How can I support my child to show progress in English? This workshop will focus on study habits parents can instill/reinforce in their children, with an emphasis on preparation for high school and college. It will also focus on community and internet based resources that parents and students can access to enrich their current educational program. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel N/A N/A N/A N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A Other TOTAL N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 04 School Name Joseph Lanzetta School Borough Manhattan School Number 96 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal David Pretto Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Shery Arce Teacher/Subject Area Grace Bustos, DLE Kindergarten Teacher/Subject Area Brunilda Ortíz, Math Related-Service Provider Andrea Kelson Superintendent Alexandra Estrella Assistant Principal James Konstantinakos Coach Juliet Luther, Bil Coach School Counselor Bea Torres Parent Jesenia Rosado Parent Coordinator Jubetsy Minaya Field Support Center Staff Member Alice Cohen Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 5 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 397 Total number of ELLs 87 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 21.91% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 3 4 K 1 2 Span. Span. 0 1 1 2012-17 2017-18 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 5 2 0 7 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Reading in the Home Language: The school uses Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System to measure progress in English reading in decoding and comprehension, over a text gradient, over time. This assessment, used for all students, including ELLs, identifies the students' independent reading level, areas of strength and need to be addressed in Guided Reading. Benchmarks are used as a standard against which student scores are compared. For this assessment type in English, it addresses all levels for all grades in which it is used. For students in Dual Language, the Spanish version is used, however it is only available up to level N. For students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  needing a measure above level N, the Spanish Evaluación del Desarrollo de la Lectura 2 (EDL2), the Spanish version of the Developmental Reading Assessment 2 (DRA2) has been ordered for the late Fall of this school year, 2017-18. All teachers including teachers of ELLs use TC running records for assessment of reading in English and in Spanish. Phonics and Word Study: For the English Phonics and Word Study components of literacy instruction in grades K-5, Fountas and Pinnell's K-5 word study resource for the classroom is used by all teachers, including those in the dual language program. For phonics in Spanish in grades K and 1, La Cartilla K-1 has been initiated in the Fall of 2017, beginning with Kindergarten. For grade 1 teachers use a research-based Palabras de Uso Frecuente word list and develop word analysis activities; In grades 2-4 Las Palabras a Su Paso was planned for beginning in 2017-18, but materials are in need of ordering. In the interim, they also use the resource for Palabras de uso frecuente for their grades. This also done in classes beyond grade 4, until another resource is identified. All classes study cognates as well, and engage in contrastive analysis. For measurement of growth in word knowledge, the English resource contains assessments that are used, as does La Cartilla. For measurement of growth in Spanish, teachers use dictados, and analyze speech and writing for application of words taught. Academic Oracy in Spanish and English: Student oracy in English, and in Spanish, whether as a new or home language, school-wide, is observed informally. Within a Shared Inquiry framework, school wide, academic conversation skills are analyzed using the Conversation Analysis Tool (CAT Tool) in English and Spanish, including in ENL (integrated and/or Stand Alone, depending on grade level and scheduling) and in all Dual Language classes. Students perform several related oral academic activities in conjunction with reading and analyzing a shared text. A pilot is underway among students in all three kinds of contexts (DL, Integrated ENL, and Monolingual GE) to promote student self-assessment, and teacher reflection on techniques, via viewing of video-recorded interactions. Academic oracy in languages other than English is observed to the degree possible. Observation of other language use is often not possible to capture in detail because teachers and students do not share a common language to sufficient degree for measurement of qualitative aspects to be done. A way to address this is yet to be identified but is of interest. Writing in the Home Language: Teachers College Writing Assessments are used to assess student writing in English and Spanish as home languages, in genre and craft. On-demand pre- and post- unit assessments are also used. Portfolio assessment of four key writing types is also used. Portfolios are used in both languages, where applicable. All teachers, including teachers of ELLs, use TC on-demand writing tasks with accommodations, and performed in one day. Oracy in the New Language (English or Spanish): The school's ELL teachers (ENL and DL) have begun this school year (2017-18) to measure oracy related to language development in English and Spanish using rubric measures. For the speaking modality, the Periodic Assessment Office's Universal English Language Development Speaking Rubric is used across any/all curricular areas to assess progress in the new language. Although designed with English as a new language in mind, the three pillars of the assessment include the New Language Arts Progressions, which, in a Dual Language Program, apply to Spanish for English Proficient students developing Spanish as a new language (i.e. Spanish Language Learners, SLLs). An examination of the rubric shows that it addresses universal aspects of speaking (i.e. vocabulary, sentence complexity, discourse) that would be expected in English and Spanish as new languages in a U.S. context. Listening will be assessed using a strand of the WIDA Consortium Can-Do Descriptors for English and Spanish as a new language development. This assessment is being implemented for the first time and is at an early stage of inclusion in the overall instructional and assessment framework. As teachers become comfortable and see where the tools can be best used, their feedback will be sought to formally adopt the tool. Writing in the New Language: The Periodic Assessment Office's Universal English Language Development Writing Rubric is being implemented for the first time, to be used for English and Spanish as a new language assessments, for ELLs and SLLs for the same reason it will be done 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  in both languages with the companion tool, in speaking. As with the speaking rubric, teachers are becoming accustomed to the tool and its formal adoption will follow their feedback. Content Areas: Pre and Post unit assessments are used in Math, Social Studies, and Science by classroom teachers. Checks for Understanding are used during units. Assessment accommodations, as described by New York State, are provided for students taking the assessments in the new language, whether English or Spanish. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? An assessment calendar for 2017-18, was provided to all teachers. Assessments included are TC reading and writing assessments, English F&P assessments, Checks for Understanding, formative assessments used for Round Robin and Shared Inquiry, and pre and post unit assessments. Professional development and coaching are provided to teachers responsible to support implementation. Structures in place to support implementation include: Weekly grade level collaborative assessment analysis and action planning with school leaders, weekly teacher team meetings for the same purpose. Targeted groups are also supported through activities within PLCs designed around pedagogical leadership development. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Screening On entrance, all students speaking a language other than English (LOTE) at home, are screened for English proficiency using a procedure that includes a test, the New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners (NYSITELL). Students identified as ELLs who speak Spanish also take the one-time Spanish screener, Spanish Language Assessment Battery (SLAB), to determine a baseline in Spanish upon entrance to a U.S. school in Kindergarten for the first time. This year 2017-18, literacy screeners will be introduced in English and Spanish, to provide for school-wide identification of students on or above grade level, approaching grade level and below or far below grade level. This will assist in school-wide, large scale planning for students in all categories, and in particular for those at risk. These screeners include the Gates-MacGinitie Reading Test, in English and Logramos in Spanish. They are expected to be used yearly, at multiple, key moments in the school year. Performance Tasks: All students including ELLs, take Performance Tasks in all subject areas, in English and Spanish, where applicable. Content Unit Tests: All students take end of unit tests in all content areas. The language of teacher-created tests will match the language in which the unit(s) are taught. English Language Arts (ELA)/Math Periodic Assessment: All students Grades 3-8 take the ELA and Math Periodic Assessments to provide school-wide, grade-wide, and classroom group data relevant to the measures on the year-end, state assessment of ELA, for school-wide planning for student support. English Language Learner Baseline and Endline Periodic Assessments: All ELLs will be measured twice a year in all four modalities of English as a new language, for the purpose of providing more recent data about their English language acquisition needs. Home Language Arts (Spanish) Beginning in Fall 2017, Spanish language arts will be assessed twice a year using the Spanish Home Language Arts (SHLA) Assessment provided by the Office of Periodic Assessment, for students in all grades K-6 in which instruction is provided in 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Spanish. This assessment will provide detailed information about student language arts abilities, aligned with NYS Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), soon to be the Next Generation Learning Standards. The information will be used to group students and plan instruction in Spanish. This assessment, together with screening, formative and summative literacy and content assessments in Spanish, will be used to evaluate program DL effectiveness in the Spanish language. Annual Assessments: New York State ELA, Math, Science (Grades 3-8) and the grades K-8 New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) assessments are routinely used to obtain summative achievement data. English is the language of assessment for all ELLs taking the ELA, and other languages are used, depending on the student, and available resources, in Math and Science. The NYSESLAT measures student progress toward English proficiency in English as a new language. These assessments inform measurement of adequate yearly progress (AYP) for the school, assist in promotional decision making for students, provide a portion of teacher evaluation calculations, and are a key resource in school planning for the upcoming school year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Data collected is analyzed by various teams, including administrators and specialists, and teacher teams. The approach taken is to bring together multiple data sources to inform next steps. Next steps include making school-wide plans for intervention, support, and enrichment, including after-school and Saturday programs, interventions during the school day, and classroom level decisions about adjusting instruction to respond to the results. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Teachers select data from multiple sources, both summative and formative, to use for analysis and decision-making. Teachers, administrators, and instructional specialists work together on looking at where the students need to improve through the lens of triangulated data, in teacher teams, grade level meetings, and individual conferences with administrators and specialists. Data sources depend on content focus, grade level, and student population. For ELLs/FELLs, it is expected that educators will use data that addresses needs across modalities and languages in addition to any other data set necessary. Once identified for additional support, ELL/FELLs and ELL/FELL SWDs are referred to the RTI team. The RTI team includes an ENL teacher who assists in the interpretation of the data, and in recommending support. Small group instruction is the instructional support format. Small group instruction is implemented in cycles with progress monitoring and flexible, periodic, adjustment as needed. To the greatest degree possible, the ELL/FELL/ and ELL/FELL/SWD student is matched to the best possible option for instructor to address the specific need(s). At the completion of a cycle, data gathered during the cycle is re-examined to determine whether or not to continue to use the same approach, take a different approach, or exit the student from the small group instruction, because goals have been met. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The assessment data used to evaluate and inform the ELL programs' effectiveness and planning for the future, has been until now, from NYSESLAT, ELA, and content area assessment outcomes; data from the EDAT tool, primarily the combining of years of service data with the assessments, was added this year, to determine levels of risk. As of now, English and Spanish assessment data from screeners, the ELL Baseline and Endline and data from the Spanish Home Language Arts BOY and EOY assessments will be added to the English language data, to form the basis of an evaluation. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In 2016-17, teachers in PLCs were supported to use the NYSESLAT and EDAT, in some cases for the first time, and in other cases, as a review of knowledge and skills already in place. Class profiles were developed by the teachers in order to examine student strengths and needs across data from multiple sources. At this time, for school year 2017-18, program level analysis will be shared with key staff in the instructional cabinet, to allow that team to take steps relevant to the results, that are within its role. The results will also be shared school-wide with all staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  through PLCs, or other staff meetings, and also through the electronic resource sharing site used by the school, to allow teachers to think about implications for instruction, and address these in planning. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Freestanding ENL is provided by two ENL teachers. One is responsible for students K-4, and the other for students in grades 5-8. All ELL students (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding) and all students who have passed a NYSESLAT within the prior two years (Commanding) are fully served. In accordance with the revised Part 154 of the Chancellor's Regulations of New York State, ENL is provided through two formats. These are: Integrated ENL, and Stand-Alone ENL. The amount of time the teacher provides each type of instruction is assigned based on the guidelines set forth by Part 154.2. Students in each grade K-8 are generally part of a class (one class all day K-4; block class 5-8, not exclusively ENL students, but containing EP and all ENL students for a grade) and are therefore heterogeneously grouped at the grade level. The ENL teacher flexibly groups and differentiates among the students when in the class for Integrated instruction, and when providing Stand-Alone, as per her judgment. In a few cases, ELLs are heterogeneously grouped in an ICT classroom as well, and the same principle applies with regard to the ENL teacher decision making once in the classroom, or with the Stand-Alone group. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. For the school year 2017-18, the Dual Language program continues to use a one-world model. The EPs and ELLs are integrated for 100% of the instructional day. English and Spanish are used as the languages of instruction in each curricular area. Languages are separated by time and space allocations for the year 2017-18 through allocated space for classroom print, and by content area units for class programs. Guided Reading approach taken is sequential literacy. Teachers differentiate to provide support for language development in ENL and SNL for all students to whom this applied, and ELA and SLA for all students. All classes are heterogeneous in each language. For school year 2017-18, following a two month-long PLC by the Dual Language vertical team, together with the Bilingual Specialist-Coordinator/Coach, during the May-June period of Spring 2017, the language allocation previously used (every other day) was examined and re-designed in light of current research about biliteracy. The language allocation is now according to content area units. In accordance with the Teaching for Biliteracy Framework, the class programs feature alternating language of instruction, by unit of instruction, and experiences in literacy, oracy, and content learning in each language, every day. Below is an example to illustrate: Reading: English, alternating by multi-week units Writing: Spanish, alternating by multi-week units Shared Inquiry: English, alternating by one-week units Word Study: Spanish, alternating by multi-week units to follow Writing Math: Spanish, alternating by multi-week units Social Studies: Always in English/rotates with Science Science: Always in Spanish/rotates with Social Studies 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  When units are brought to a close, there is a bridge launched to transition into the next unit of study. This bridge is for the purpose of student-centered cross-linguistic analysis to identify key academic language in the target language of the unit that was just completed, and identify the academic language that would be used to communicate about the main concepts in the other language. Students work with cognates, other key terms, phrases and ways to express content learning in the non-targeted language for that unit. This is followed by an extension in that language. This revision to the program is new and subject to on-going adjustment. Careful attention is being paid to account for the continuation of a 50-50 balance between the languages. In addition to the above, the program has extended and expanded. Last year, there was one DL program class in each grade K-4. This year there is one DL program class in grades K-5 because the existing Grade 4 extended into Grade 5. The expansion consists of an added middle school program as a result of a grant to add a middle school program. The first class of this program was to be a Grade 6 Self-Contained DL class, however, due to an enrollment error beyond the control of the school, students recruited to the program during the middle school application process were not students with previous DL experience or literacy (and in many cases oracy) in Spanish. In addition, there are 2 ELL students for whom Spanish is the home language, and one inclusion ELL of the same description, participating part time. This means that for this year, students will participate in a hybrid program that incorporates Spanish as a new language, heritage language, and Spanish for Native Speakers (SNS). This is incorporated during Social Studies and Science, with support in word study and shared reading experiences. It is expected that next year, this group of students will move on to grade seven with a Spanish as a foreign language component to their departmentalized program, and the present Grade 5 DL class will move up to Grade 6 DL for 2018-19. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All ELL students, served by ENL in all grades, are served as follows in ENL, by level: Entering and Emerging students receive a total minimum of 360 minutes per week. In most cases for both categories the time is evenly divided between Stand-Alone and ELA-Integrated services. As per the allowance for flexibility, where feasible and where teachers or administrators determine it may be advantageous, Emerging students are, at times, also served in content areas for 90 minutes. ELA Integrated services remain at 180 minutes, minimum. Transitioning students were served during a total of 180 minutes a week. Ninety of these were in ELA-Integrated services, and the other 90 through either Stand-alone or content areas, as per teacher judgment, administrative preferences, and schedule feasibilty. Expanding students are served by a total of 180 minutes, all of which are provided in ELA-Integrated format. Commanding students, who achieved this score within the last two years, are provided with a total of 90 minutes of ENL, also all in the integrated format. All ENL students in Dual Language are provided with ENL services by the classroom teacher, through grouping for instruction that allots more than the minimums described above to each student, during English language instructional time in ELA and content areas. Home language arts is prescribed for TBE as a period each day, however in a Dual language primary grade class, students are provided instruction across all literacy block and content areas in the LOTE during scheduled times for that instructional language, thus students therefore exceed the minimums in language arts in Spanish. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  For all instructional programs there are some universals: Balanced Literacy is used to provide instruction in literacy, academic oracy is provided through Socratic Seminar, and classroom discussions framed by protocols. Content areas integrate literacy and oracy practices, and also use project-based and hands-on approaches. These approaches are taken across languages of instruction. ENL Program: Integrated format Integrated ENL instruction is provided in ELA. The teacher of ELA and ENL coordinate to provide CCLS based ELA. The teacher of ELA is primarily responsible for planning ELA instruction, and the ENL teacher provides ELLs with support for the language demands of all tasks. Content area integrated ENL is planned similarly. The language of instruction is English. ENL Program: Stand-Alone format Stand-alone instruction in ENL is used to provide language development opportunities and additional support for ELA and/or content area tasks, through more closely tutoring the students. The language of instruction is English. In both formats, teachers use scaffolds, such as grouping for instruction to co-construct understanding, and build knowledge, visuals, written scaffolds for speaking and writing, TPR, and guides to read and listen. The teacher, as able, may also provide home language support verbally or using resources, or by encouraging collaboration between students sharing a common language. Dual Language Education (Enrichment): The Dual language program provides all language arts, content area, and language development through the school-wide approaches in English, and through the adaptation of these in Spanish. Dual language teachers also employ the same kinds of comprehensibility supports and supports for language production that ENL teachers provide, but they do so in two languages. The addition to these approaches that will be unique to the DLE program as of the Fall 2017, will be to provide instruction through the Teaching for Biliteracy Framework. This framework will take the existing units of instruction and allocate language to them in a new format. Each unit will culminate in a bridge to promote academic language development in the language other than the one used to teach the unit. This component is designed to not only encourage transference of language and knowledge, but to leverage and foster the growth of, meta-linguistic skills used for cross-linguistic analysis by emergent bilinguals. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Assessment tools (see formative and summative assessments described above) have been carefully selected to provide for multiple forms of assessments in Spanish, to match those used in English, throughout the school year. Compliance with these assessments, in accordance with the school assessment calendar will be monitored. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE At this time, the school has 1 SIFE student, so it does not have sufficient numbers of SIFE, to form a separate program during or after school. SIFE students are identified as such to teachers and other providers and differentiation is provided to attend to their academic needs. This differentiation must be highly individualized and is difficult to state in a general sense because SIFE students can range between having no literacy to low home language literacy. Literacy in any case, is a strong priority for these students, as well as basic foundations of content areas and academic habits. In addition, teachers make an effort to attend to their social needs stemming from lack of school experience. The Home and New Language Arts Progressions are used to guide teachers to support these students. English language development and home language literacy are prioritized. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Newcomers Newcomers are assisted to acclimate to school in the United States, and provided with ENL instruction in accordance with their proficiency levels. The Home and New Language Arts Progressions, as applicable, among other grade level academic standards and tools, are used to plan instruction supporting their growth in all language modalities, across languages, as applicable, and across all curricular areas. Grouping within the classroom and partnerships are used, as well as visuals and other scaffolds; in Stand Alone instruction, language development is prioritized. Developing ELLs Since classes are heterogeneous, and Developing ELLs are students whose levels of performance vary across multiple domains, differentiated instruction is provided to assist in their growth. The tools for comprehensibility, language production, and cross linguistic analysis, are used as per the needs student data suggest. The Home and New Language Arts Progressions are used to assist teachers in identifying typical needs across this subgroup and to differentiate. Long Term ELLs Long term ELLs are also varied and face numerous challenges among social and academic areas. The ENL provider assesses the areas of strengths and needs across multiple domains and prioritizes academic language and literacy through modeling, providing tools, such as graphic organizers, rubrics or criteria lists with support to understand them, and examples for students to emulate, as they address academic tasks. Teachers provide additional close monitoring and conferring. Former ELLs All Commanding students are served in the same classes as their peers who are current ELLs for two years following their attainment of CM on the NYSESLAT. They are provided support for areas of academic language and habits and in literacy or background, as their needs are dictated by the data. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Generally, students who are ELLs and have disabilities fall into the category of Speech and language disabilities. For these students, instruction to develop new language oracy can be helpful, in addition to specific assistance from the out of classroom provider (if SETSS) or from the teacher of students with Special Needs in the ICT classroom. Instructional strategies for developing and practicing oracy are the same as for typically developing students (Socratic Seminar, small group instruction, and student collaborations, whole class discussions). There are some students who need occupational therapy or counseling, as well. These student needs are provided by an out-of-classroom provider who coordinates with the teacher in the classroom for any complementary action that can be taken. Teachers use professional resources to inform their practices in the classroom, but no specialized materials are used. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students are given extra support based on their IEP goals and the indicated personnel are coordinated to provide such support. They are grouped according to their IEP goals and also based on other student data and are given the mandated services based on their IEP. The school has an ESL Saturday program as well to help those students develop their listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills, some of whom are ELL/SWDs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLS are afforded equal access to all school programs. Program participation during the day is decided based on needs. There is a Saturday Academy ENL program which uses an intervention program that helps the students needing support in reading, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  writing, speaking and listening skills. Participating students engage with materials following the Balanced Literacy approach and are appropriate for all levels of our ELL’s. Math intervention is done through differentiated instruction during the regular school day. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The Dual Language program extended into Grade 5. In addition, since there was no program using a bilingual approach in grades 6-8 and a majority of Spanish speaking ELLs in that grade, a Middle School Dual Language program was to be opened in Fall of 2017. As explained in detail previously, the program is a Spanish as a new language/heritage program for this Fall in Grade 6, due to enrollment limitations beyond the school's control, but will be a Spanish/English DL Grade 6 in the Fall of 2018. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs/services for ELLs will be discontinued at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are invited to participate in all school programs and every effort is made to inform them, their families, and to encourage their participation. Translated documents and oral translation are provided in person and over the phone, to caregivers who are speaker of other languages, to facilitate equity. In addition, some programs are specialized to their needs. As part of College Access All, there is a College and Career Readiness for ELL Grant application that has been completed to address the particular needs of ELLs; This plan is pending approval. There is an approved Immigrant Plan that includes ELLs, and T3 plan for Entering and Emerging ELLs; The Achieve Now Tutoring program includes ELLs, as does the Algebra Regents Class, for 8th grade students, including ELLs; Civics and Community Service Education through Community Service Club membership also includes ELLs, with a particular focus on expanding school-wide consciousness of the bilingual/multilingual student body through a newly created Bilingual Newsletter. There is also a Student Council to document the participatory budget process, including ELL students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The I-Ready computer program is used as well as Great Leaps, Ready Gen and Expeditionary Learning programs are utilized. All students, including ELLs were provided with iPads from Verizon, with service at home as well as at school. Next year, all students, including ELLs will benefit from Makers Space. Expeditionary learning and Ready Gen will be discontinued. TCRWWS will replace all literacy curricula in all grades, along with Junior Great Books and a Spanish Language custom library of short stories for the shared reading component of the curricula. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language assessment data, measuring language and/or literacy or content area progress, tied to cycles of specific home language support provided in DL and ENL, are collected and analyzed to determine if instruction is effective and decide next steps. The home language is used for 50% of instructional time in DL and up to 20% of the time in an ENL program, and there is an expectation that where it is useful, it is to be provided. This includes using home language resources for students in monolingual classes (teachers may have or access from another location, teacher). Teachers in both programs must use the data they collect about the home language to fortify the instructional core and differentiate. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The administration provides clear guidelines to service providers such that they are aware of the requirement to provide age and grade-appropriate instruction. In addition, the administration provides to all school staff, pacing calendars and curriculum resources so that all those providing instruction or services to students have access to grade-level standards-based curricula and timelines. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  NA. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). This school year 2017-18 began with an August 30-Sept 1 week incoming middle school student program, that included ELLs. This BRIDGE prog, based on knowledge of enrollment, was implemented by David Pretto, Principal, Damelvy Rodríguez, Ahmed Ali, and Emily Schofield, of the CBO Global Kids, and Ralph Pérez, School Aide. Staff named, who were on hand at the activities, included personnel who are bilingual in Spanish and English, and Arabic and English, representing two of the languages spoken by the students at 96. Activities assisted students, including ELLs by providing orientation to the middle school grades with a focus on their attendance in sixth grade. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We currently offer Spanish as a New/Heritage/SNS Language to Grade 6 students, including ELLs, and expect this to become a similar class for next year's 7th graders, including ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. For the dual language program the self-contained model is used. The EPs and ELLs are integrated a total of 100% of the instructional day. b. English and Spanish is taught in each content area.c. Languages are allocated to separate days, in an every-other-day rotation.d. Emergent literacy is taught sequentially through Guided Reading; all other Balanced Literacy components are subject to the every-other-day rotation. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? DELLS As per teacher interest, needs, and program assignment, teachers will obtain support from professional development provided by the central office and their contracted providers; frequency varies. Conferences For Dual language and ENL providers, conferences may be indicated: NYS TESOL, the Dual Language Symposium, and NYSABE. Frequency varies. Seminars and Workshops-Spanish: Teachers, as per assignment to teach in Spanish, may attend activities at Instituto Cervantes, or at universities holding RBRN events to develop teacher skills for Spanish language, literacy, and content area instruction. Frequency varies. School Level: Cycles of PLCs, provided once weekly, coordinated by administration, lead by colleagues, including specialists and teachers, on topics related to classroom practices. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  Grade Level: Teachers of ELLs will plan for ELLs together with grade level teachers in teams once a week. Department level: Dual Language Department will meet once a week to address DLE practices. Classroom level: Cycles of coaching support in teaching practices for ELLs, provided by Bilingual Coach. Frequency varies. A partial list of topics includes: Assessment types and implications for teaching, academic language, literacy in a new language, biliteracy, using the Home and New Language Progressions to support ELLs, scaffolding for ELLs, teaching in Spanish (various topics), language development, sheltering strategies. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The school is engaged in a year-long focus on academic discourse supported by QTEL instructional routines implemented school wide; Teachers receive on-going support in grade teams, teacher teams, and in PLCs, as well as outside of school, where possible, or from a colleague turn-key of the outside support. In this way, all pedagogues will meet the percent total hours required. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Teachers make phone, email, and written contacts with families of ELLs in the Fall and Spring to invite parents/guardians/caregivers to attend meetings to understand ELL student learning and services, assessments, and any matter related to the ELL students' and students' families needs and/or questions. If parents are not able to come to the meeting, the meeting is offered as a phone call. To follow up the phone call, a summary of the conversation is send home for signature and return. All meetings in person are documented by parent signature and pedagogue notes. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental activities for school year 2017-18 address the needs of the parents based on the survey that was sent to the parents through the school. Parents choose what kinds of activities/workshops they would like to attend. Providers of workshops will range from among the ENL, DL, Parent coordinator, CBO employees, or collaborative pairs or groups of such staff. The DL Department also holds specific activities throughout the year, such as celebrations, related to the program and student learning. Field trips are another point of contact with parents of ELLs who accompany classes and in this way become acquainted with the school, its teachers and programs. Parent Job-Net CBO is providing ESL classes for parents in 12 week cycles, 4 days/week, during the day, beginning late Nov.; The T3 Immigrant Plan incorporates families of ELLs as well, in collaborative community learning activities done with their children. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  2018-19 SCEP-FL 75 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, David Pretto, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS/MS 96 ACT School DBN: 04M096 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) David Pretto Title Principal James Konstantinakos Assistant Principal Jubetsy Minaya Parent Coordinator Shery Arce, ENL ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jesenia Rosado Parent Brunilda Ortíz, Grade 5 Teacher/Subject Area Grace Bustos, K DL Teacher/Subject Area Juliet Luther, Bil Coach Bea Torres Alexandra Estrella Alice Cohen Andrea Kelson, IEP and SETTS Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Teacher/Coordinator- Students with Disabilities Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 04M096 School Name: P.S.96M Superintendent: Estrella The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. According to our data, the survey that all parents fill out at the time of registration, usually determines their home language. The survey is available in at least nine different languages. At the parent request, a translator will be available to answer any questions and assist in completing the Home Language Survey. Once the survey is completed and reviewed,this information is entered in ATS to ensure that all materials that are sent home, are written in their primary spoken language. Many parents have limited English speaking/writing abilities. Therefore all notices that are sent home are translated in Spanish. Other languages are translated on a need basis. Since the majority of our ELL students parents are spanish speaking, it is very important that all school notices are translated. The parents are kept well informed about the needs of their child's academic progress. Also parents will be notified about their child's grades which is will be automatically downloaded in their written and spoken language. The Home Languge survey is also used to determine whether or not the parent needs written and oral 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  translation for notices that will be sent home in all regards. If for any reason a parent needs a written translation concerning any information regarding their child's education, we will transcibe the information and /or contact the translation and intrepretation unit to assist. The school houses many teachers who are fluent in reading ,writing and speaking spanish . We utilize their services as needed. If a parent needs an oral interpretation, we have staff members who are readily available to assist. For others languages other than spanish, the school reaches out to the other resources, but not limited to the translation unit. During Parent Teacher Conference translations are requested and obtained by the staff and or translation unit to assist as needed. The additional ways tha our school has collected data is by using the ATS Report on Preferred Languages. Our school uses this important piece of information. By examining this report the school is able to look at the different languages that are used at home by the parents. They could better prepare for the use of having interpreters and using the Language and Interpretation Unit. Our staff uses the Student Emergency Contact cards to collect important contact information about the student. It is necessary to contact the parents regarding any upcoming school event or to reach out to the parent for information regarding their child. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Currently at the school, the parents preferred languages for both written communication are Spanish, Arabic and English. For oral communication, the parents preferred languages are Spanish, Arabic and English. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The documents that require translation such as a handbook for the parents will be translated for the parents. This will be distributed at the beginning of the school year. The school calendar will be distributed at the beginning of the year. There will also be monthly calendars that will be distributed every month. Parent-teacher conference announcements will be given out as the date of the conference is approaching. The New York testing dates will be distributed at the beginning of the year and once again when the testing date is approaching. Teachers will distribute the student curriculum during back to school night at the beginning of the year. This curriculum will be distributed once again during parent teacher conferences. Letters from the school leadership will be distributed after the school leadership holds its meetings. Class trip permission slips will be distributed prior to each class trip.Parent workshops will be distributed when the parents will be attending a workshop at the school. ESL Saturday Academy permission slips will be distributed prior to the start of the program. Events for parents will be held twice during the school year. One event will be held in the fall for the parents and another event will be held in the spring. An interpreter will be at the event for the parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? There are many times in which the staff will have face to face meetings with the parents. Teachers will meet with the parents during parent-teacher conferences which are held twice a year. Curriculum nights will also be held during the year. The attendance teacher will speak to the parents on a case by case situation. The guidance counselor will also speak to the parents when needed by phone. The school plans to disseminate parent-facing documents and submit translation requests to the Translation and Interpretation Unit two weeks ahead of time. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All parents whose primary language is other than English, will receive a copy of the Bill of Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. In the main school lobby a sign will be posted of the most prominent languages indicating the availability of translation and intepretation services. Since our school has more than 10% of our parents whose primary is other than English, we will obtain, post and provide such forms in accordance with the translation and intepretation unit. Parent notification will be provided to all parents 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  informing them of the Department of Education's website as it pertains to the translation and intepretation sevices available and how to access this website. All documents can be found at the Translation and Interpretation Unit's intranet site. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will gather information from the parent survey. Parents will be asked to fill out a parent survey to evaluate the quality and availability of translation services. Parents will be asked to fill out the survey after each parent meeting. The survey will be distributed to the parents by the ESL teacher. It will be translated into the parents' preferred language. The data will be collected and placed into a binder and kept in the ESL room. The ESL teacher will evaluate the response of the surveys in order to make a determination of the translation service that was provided to the parents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82 
