2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 04M108 School Name: P.S. 108 ASSEMBLYMAN ANGELO DEL TORO EDUCATIONAL COMPLEX Principal: WILLIAM GLADSTONE 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School of Authors (PS/MS108M) 310400010108 3K-8 School Number (DBN): 04M108 1615 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10029 212-860-5804 Phone Number: 212-860-6095 Fax: William Gladstone wgladstone@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: William Gladstone Amanda Walsh Lisa Matthew Zataish Grenardo Chasity Vega N/A Mira Gandy District Information Geographical District: 04 Alexandra Estrella Superintendent: 160 East 120 Street, New York, NY 10035 Superintendent’s Office Address: Astrel3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-348-2873 Phone Number: 212-348-4107 Fax: Manhattan-D4 Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7 th Ave., NY, NY 10001 Ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-705-5856 Phone Number: 718-923-5146 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) William Gladstone Amanda Walsh Lisa Matthew *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Zataish Grenardo KadeejahWilliams Evelyn Steinhart Parent Teacher Parent Member/   Krystal Pizzaro Arlene Falcon Xiomara Sandoval Madeline Salazar Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Parent Teacher Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our mission is to create a community of authors who use their skills and agency to author their own futures and strive for peace, justice, and dignity for all people. At the School of Authors we will nurture all students' social and   emotional growth and ensure their success through thoughtful consideration of each individual student's strengths and needs, an engaging curriculum and high expectations for all. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS/MS 108 is located in East Harlem on Madison Avenue between 108th and 109th streets. Our 3K to 8th Grade school has 470 students representing an ethnically diverse population comprised of 59% Hispanic, 34% African American, 7% other, including white (non-Hispanic), American Indian, Asian, and students from multi-racial backgrounds. Students, faculty and administrators trust in the value of hard work and maintain high expectations because they see themselves as lifelong learners. Teachers continually work at improving and enhancing pedagogical practices and they are deeply involved in their own learning. Parents are an important part of our school community. They are involved in leadership positions within the school and work together with teachers and staff to ensure that all of our children get the education they deserve. The 108 family works hard to ensure that our students are provided with different experiences that will set them up for success for years to come. Our school has established strong partnerships with numerous cultural and educational organizations in order to enhance our commitment to equity, social justice, social, emotional and physical health, as well as enhancing our academic program by exposing students to a wide range of studio and performing arts. -The Leadership Program -Mount Sinai Hospital -Urban Advantage Science Program -Asphalt Green -NY Philharmonic -Learning Leaders -Northside Center -NYC Public Library -Hunter College student teacher and intern placement office -Hunter College: East Harlem Reads -CUNY Technology Internship Program -First Book -Cookshop -Slow Food 0  -Buen Provecho -The Nature Conservancy -The Fashion Foundation -Harlem Justice Court -Jeremy’s Heroes: Basketball and Fitness -Asphalt Green Swimming, Flag Football -Very Young Composers -Opus Violin Program -Black Girls Code -The Metropolitan Museum -The Museum of Modern Art -CHAMPS soccer and volleyball -Road Runners, Young Runners Program - NYC Autism Charter School - Mock Trial -Morningside Center Restorative Circles -Shakespeare Forum Theater -Middle School Crew 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school has a total of four hundred and seventy (470) students in grades 3K-8 and one hundred and thirty-five (135) are special education students representing approximately 33% of our K-8 student population. Additionally, forty one (41) students are English Language Learners representing approximately 9% of our population. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 1  Our school has made the most gains in the area of Supportive Environment. We have worked extremely hard in providing an educational experience that encompasses the social-emotional growth of our students. As we continue to enhance our learning experience for students our key area of focus will be in the domain of Rigorous Instruction. Theory of Action for Rigorous Instruction: If, during the planning process, the teachers sequence the learning progress by looking at the standards, working out the assessment (based on the standards), and then developing the curricular instructional content and strategies, we will be able to bring coherence to the learning experience of students and increase the percentage of students who attain levels 3-4 on the State tests. By providing teachers with the training and tools for Data-driven instruction through weekly Professional development, a regular team meeting structure and ongoing feedback sessions, teacher will be able to vertically align units with their goals, strategies and assessments as well as tailor individualized instruction in order to increase student performance. Theory of Action for Supportive Environment: If we provide weekly grade team meetings that focus on the social and emotional needs of students, CREW teachers will be able to help students develop the skills necessary to understand and manage emotions, set and achieve goals, feel and show empathy for others, establish and maintain positive relationships and make responsible decisions. The administration will continue to provide opportunities for all staff and students to develop restorative practices through both in-house and externally provided professional development. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 04M108 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 452 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 74 73 17 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 64 63 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 88.7% % Reduced Lunch 9.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 62.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.1 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 28.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 93% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 36 36 89.4% 0.2% 32.1% 31.9% 3.3% 0.7% 4 16% 8.4 21.1% 43% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. At the School of Authors we have been working intentionally to align our instruction to the state standards to ensure that our students are adequately prepared to perform at a high level on the state assessments. Additionally, we have introduced a data-tracking system to allow teachers the opportunities to gather and analyze data to inform their instruction. 2. Based on test score trends over the last 4 years, our priority is to increase the percentage of students who are performing at, or above grade level, in math and ELA. New York State Test % Proficient Data: Approaching Target Math 2014-2015: 13.9% Math 2015-16: 15.8% Math 2016-2017: 13% Math 2017-18: 21% ELA 2014-15: 14.5% ELA 2015-16: 20.1% ELA 2016-2017: 13% ELA 2017-18: 28% Part 2 – Annual Goal 4  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019: •Literacy Goal: Teachers will work in content teams to create standards aligned assessments before creating their unit/lesson plans. By June 2019, students will show a 20% increase in NYS ELA exam scores. •Mathematics Goal: Teachers will work in content teams to create standards aligned assessments before creating their unit/lesson plans. By June 2019, students will show a 20% increase in NYS Math exam scores. 5 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Pre-K to 8th Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, classroom teachers, instructional coaches, teacher leaders, teacher grade-level teams Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teacher teams will create a bank of periodic assessments that are aligned to all, or parts of, the New York State tests in grades K-8  The assessment committee will create a calendar for all periodic assessments  Teachers will engage in a cycle of professional development on data-driven instruction  Teacher team meetings will use a data analysis protocol to look at patterns and trends in student performance and to differentiate instruction for students with gaps in their skill attainment Instructional cabinet will look at school-wide data to inform decisions on programming and curricular modifications   Teacher teams will specifically look at the data of student subgroups in order to address the performance gap between students with disabilities, English language learners and their mainstream peers.  The administration will share a new grading system and metric used to accurately report student progress on state standards 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School of Authors will build upon the success of Student Led Conferences (SLCs) to have students take responsibility for monitoring and explaining their instructional progress to their families. Parents will be given access to, and trained in the use of Jupiter Grades to monitor their child's progress 24/7. All instructional staff are responsible for the sharing of information with families about student led conferences and Jupiter Grades. Administration will monitor family attendance of SLC's as well as provide a survey for the parents to comment on their value and suggestions for improvement. Likewise, administration will have access to all Jupiter Grades accounts and monitor the usage by families and the data input of teachers. 6  Parent workshops will be held monthly and organized by the PA, the Community School Director and the Parent Coordinator on, among other topics, the new grading system and how to monitor student progress, how best to support to their children at home and understand the learning goals of their children, strategies on homework help, orientation to the new State standards, impact of healthy food and physical activity on academic performance, how to achieve high attendance and the correlation between attendance and performance, the high school application process, and access to outside resources to support student achievement. Attendance records will be maintained so that the school can continuously improve on reaching more families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. As a Title I School-wide program school, we will incorporate Conceptual Consolidation which will allow us to combine Federal and local funds to include Fair Student Funding (Tax Levy), Title I Funds, Title IIA Supplemental, Title III Funds and human resources to maximize our budget resources to improve student achievement. Library Books – TL NYSTL Library Books Jupiter Grades, a student learning management system ELLs Innovative Programs – Title III Supplies – Title I SWP Per Session – TL Citywide Instructional Per Diem - TL Citywide Instructional Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 30% of students in grades 3-8 will achieve a 70% or above on the RALLY ELA benchmark and the school-designed math benchmark assessments in grades 3-8. At least 70% of K-2 students reading below grade level in September will approach the grade level benchmark by March, 2019 as measured the Teachers College running records. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher’s College Running Records (K-5) ELA Benchmark Assessment (3-8) School-designed math benchmark assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our strength has been training teachers on how to support students who exhibit challenging behavior. Currently75% of our teachers, Paraprofessionals and other staff have received training on Restorative Practices. We continue to develop new ways to support our students and teachers in supporting the whole child, including s strong emphasis on healthy eating and lifestyle choices. Data from the Framework for Great Schools Report 2017: -76% of students felt that safety was not a concern in the school -57% of students expressed that classroom behavior was a concern -88% of teachers expressed that we provide social-emotional support to our students Data from other sources: -90% overall attendance rate for the 2017-18 school year School is utilizing restorative practices to support students’ socio-emotional growth. Additionally, we have a Dean of Culture and a Community Associate who are responsible for supporting teachers and students in developing better habits for students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, OORS incidents, level 3 and above will decrease by 20% By June 2019, school-wide attendance rate will increase from 90% to above 91.5% for all students. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Create positive and productive weekly grade team structure meeting All Staff & Students Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Assistant Principal Grade/ Team Leaders, Teachers, Dean and Community Assocaite Select grade team leaders   Create a consistent meeting structure/calendar  establish meeting norms to ensure productive and efficient use of time  Weekly Grade team facilitator meetings as part of Principal's cabinet  Collect and review data around structures Consistently monitor and follow through with community agreed-upon non-negotiable rules and expectations 1. Dean collects data on non-negotiables 2. Rules and expectations shared in student handbook 3. Periodic review of data +Jupiter comments of specific students during crisis team meetings and grade team meetings 4. Daily lunch and after school reflection 5. Daily walk through checking for consistent structures 6. Trackers and behavioral plans created for specific students in crisis Provide ongoing development and supports for Restorative Practices 1. Create schedule and responsibilities for Conflict resolution 2. Create PD opportunities and calendar around restorative practices as well as the social and emotional (SEL) health of children through the RULER project 3. Grade team meetings a reused, in part, to reflect on the specific needs of identified children through case studies 4. Bi-weekly crisis team meetings with students nominated in advance to focus on Improved attendance rate supports: All Staff & Students Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Assistant Principal 0 - School Messenger: Send notifications to families when a child is absent or late (daily) -Determine an expectation, time, and procedure for late arrivals -Sending monthly letter home with # of absences and lateness (below 95% for students) -Awards ceremony for students who have 100% attendance each month -Use of data to identify and publicize the relationship of high academic achievement to absences and lateness -Create success mentor relationships between adults and students with attendance risks -Use of data sorter to identify patterns and trends in attendance Create system for celebrating/recognizing core values 1. Core value celebration calendar created 2. Determine what happens during celebration and process for selection 3. Create visual spaces messaging core values 4. Positive academic habits identified and instituted on Jupiter grades for tracking and feedback 5. Habits celebration calendar created 6. Determine what happens during celebration and process for selection 7. Create visual spaces messaging habits 8. Core values and habits posted throughout the building Grade/ Team Leaders, Teachers, Dean of Culture and Community Associate, Guidance Counselors, Pupil Personnel Secretary, Community School Director All Staff & Students Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Assistant Principal Grade/ Team Leaders, Teachers, Dean of Culture, Culture and Community Committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The Principal holds monthly breakfast meetings with school community to share the vision and practical supports for providing a safe and caring environment for the students. The Community School Director and the PA President organizes monthly workshops on a range of topics include anti-bullying, helathy lifestyles, restorative practices, and cyber safety. The Dean of Students and his team will communicate directly to families of students who are at risk. The guidance counselors work with all families to reinforce the expectations of the school around safety and security as well as strategies for cultivating the social and emotional health of all students. Through a variety of mediums including our new social media platforms, families will be fully versed in the new school core values and see concrete examples of students realizing those values. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 1  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. As a Title I School-wide program school, we will incorporate Conceptual Consolidation which will allow us to combine Federal and local funds to include Fair Student Funding (Tax Levy), Title I Funds, Title IIA Supplemental, Title III Funds and human resources to maximize our budget resources to improve student achievement. Library Books – TL NYSTL Library Books ELLs Innovative Programs – Title III Supplies – Title I SWP Per Session – TL Citywide Instructional Per Diem - TL Citywide Instructional Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, OORS incidents, level 3 and above will decrease by 30%. By January 2019, school-wide attendance rate will increase above 90%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS Reporting System Data School’s Monthly Attendance Data from ATS Data sorter from New Schools Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School Survey 2017-18: Strength: Students feel their culture is appreciated  Parents were pleased with teachers  Parents felt appreciated  Teachers are cordial to one another  Teachers feel responsible for student learning   Communication between parents and teachers is positive  A lot of culture awareness  Teachers feel they are modifying  Environment accepting of backgrounds  Teachers continuously trying new ideas Growth Areas:  Teachers expressed interest in receiving more professional development, visiting other schools, improving school morale  Teachers expressed interest in improving and increasing opportunities for Principal/staff/teacher collaborations Quality Review 2016-17 Data (2.2, 4.2): Developing Strength:  Teachers engaging in inter-visitations  Teachers meeting twice a month  Teachers examining student work  Discussing strategies  Creating an end goal   Monitor and determine student outcomes Sharing best practices and sharing strategies Growth Areas:  Unclear how the students would be monitored  Use of specific protocols or structures were not evident 3   Need a follow up/next steps  Consistency of modifications in each class Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, classroom teachers will be involved in weekly data driven instruction (DDI) cycles with grade design teams (K-4) and/or content teams (5-8). They will be engaged in meaningful professional development experiences as evidenced by 90% of classroom teachers enhancing Tier 2 interventions and improve student academic performance for all students including ELLs, SWDs, at-risk students, and high performing students. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher teams will meet regularly to look at student work/data, examine curriculum in relation to CCLS, diagnosing what changes and supports are needed to improve student performance, develop a plan for improvement of student performance, review and/or adjust plans during/after plan implementation, and exam teacher practice to enhance Tier 1 instruction and improve student academic performance for all students including ELLs, SWDs, and at-risk students. Through professional learning, teachers will engage in professional conversations and professional development geared at enhancing teacher practice and increase student achievement.  Mondays Professional Development Cycles  Content Teams selecting and using protocols to analyze data  Principal's Instructional Cabinet creating instructional vision and agendas for professional development  Curriculum Planning Sessions working backwards from common assessments and driven by state standards  Off site professional development/Inter-school Visitations to acquire best practices in instructional planning and delivery  Creating of assessment calendar to administer periodic assessments in math and ELA Inter-class visitations will assist in developing teacher practices aligned to the needs of specific teachers and Danielson’s Framework for Teaching.  Teachers and leadership staff will engage in professional conversations through observation and feedback cycles designed to promote improved pedagogy aligned to Danielson Framework for Teaching. Leadership staff will conduct regular instructional walk-throughs for norming purposes and gathering evidence to determine alignment between teacher practice and student learning.  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers and support specialists K to 8th Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Instructional Cabinet Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Teachers and support specialists Pre-K to 8th Principal, Assistant Principals, Coaches, Teacher Leaders, Consultants Teachers and support specialists K to 8th Teachers K to 8th Sept. 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Universal Literacy Coach, Read East Harlem Coach Principal, Assistant Principals, TDEC, Coaches 5 Leadership staff will be norming observation debriefs to ensure consistency in the type of feedback that teachers are receiving. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school organizes family workshops in the fall and spring to share curriculum and instructional resources to help them understand the expectations for their children and synchronize supports that they can provide in the home. We provide grade level meetings on Tuesday afternoons with families to go over more precise information that pertains to the yardsticks for academic progress and social and emotional growth that are age appropriate. All meetings lay the groundwork for student led conferences in late November. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. As a Title I School-wide Program, Conceptual Consolidation will allow us to combine Federal and local funds such as Fair Student Funding (Tax Levy), Title I Funds, Title IIA Supplemental Funds and human resources to support program initiatives to refine data driven instruction. We will use protocols to examine student work and enable us to adjust instruction and inform planning to ensure high levels of rigor and challenge for students. Professional Development Resources 21st Century Grant CUNY Tech internship Program Library Books – TL NYSTL Library Books Professional Development Consultants from East Harlem Reads Supplies – Title I SWP Per Session – TL Citywide Instructional Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 100% of teacher teams will be fully utilizing the data driven instruction cycle. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 6  -Conference Notes -Team meeting agendas/minutes -Lesson plans demonstrating student groupings and interventions for groups of students -Increase student proficiency in academic performance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Feedback is critical for professional growth. Currently at the school we have an open door policy and teachers are free to reach out to any of the school leaders for support. Additionally, principal and AP meet regularly with teachers to discuss next steps following observations for coaching support. Our growth area is completing the total number of observations in a timely manner so teachers can get consistent support throughout the year. 2016-17 MOTP Data: -60% of teachers rated effective or highly effective -8 teachers with a Teacher Improvement Plan School Survey 2016-17: Strength: Sets high standards for student learning  Positive Relationship between principal and parents   Review of curriculum materials with alignment to CCSS   Parent/Teacher and Parent/leaders trust very high Setting standards for student behavior Growth Areas: Selecting instructional materials   Developing instructional materials  Deciding if the curriculum is effective at the end of year  Clearer expectations for teachers  Understanding how all students learn  Participating in planning with teams  Expectations implementing PD  Use of materials across classes/grades  Communicates a clear vision for the school  Tracking student achievement  Knows what is happening in the classrooms. 8  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, the leadership team will observe teachers using the Danielson's Framework for Teaching along with analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth including professional learning opportunities and timely effective and actionable feedback that will result in 70% of teachers receiving a minimal rating of effective or highly effective in Advance. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Leadership team will engage in timely feedback and observation debriefs with clear next steps that accurately capture the strengths and growth areas of teacher practice and its impact on student learning The Leadership team will implement a system to track teacher observations/feedback, monitor growth over time, and identify individual needs of teachers and supports through other professional learning opportunities including Interclass visitations that will assist in developing teacher practices aligned to the needs of specific teachers and Danielson’s Framework for Teaching Teachers and support specialists Pre-K to 8th Teachers and support specialists Pre-K to 8th Develop and communicate a school’s vision and mission demonstrating a set of beliefs about how our students learn best and support teachers through observation and feedback cycles to develop teaching practices informed by Danielson Framework for Teaching Teachers and support specialists Pre-K to 8th Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, TDEC Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, TDEC, Model Teacher Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Cabinet, Model Teacher Teachers will incorporate best practices/actionable next steps within instruction and curricular decisions with specific strategies to meet the needs of subgroups including English Language Learners, Special Education Students, and students at-risk. Teachers and support specialists Pre-K to 8th Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Model Teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents meet with the principal on a monthly basis for questions and answers regarding school concerns and continuous improvement of school policies. Principal also meets weekly with PA and Parent Coordinator to address concerns and design strategies to improve outreach and communication strategies. Informally, the Principal and Assistant Principal meet with individual families at arrival and dismissal every day to hear immediate concerns and needs of specific students. An annual Community School Forum organized and facilitated by the SLT and the Community School Director will be held in the spring designed for families to give detailed feedback on school environment, attendance, curriculum and enrichment, health and mental health, family engagement and community partnerships. 0  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. As a Title I School-wide Program, Conceptual Consolidation will allow us to combine Federal and local funds such as Fair Student Funding (Tax Levy), Title I Funds, Title IIA Supplemental Funds and human resources to support system-wide implementation of a research based rubric that promotes teacher reflection, increased rigor, within curriculum, pedagogical growth, and student engagement. Per Diem – Contracts for Excellent CUNY Tech Per Session – TL Citywide Instructional Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, the Principal and Assistant Principals will have conducted 50% of formal and informal observations including timely and effective actionable feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. -Advance Data -Observation tracker Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a community we continue to strive to include parents in the life of the school and to influence their positive perspective on the reputation of the school. We encourage our parents to participate in the social and academic events of our school. Our Student-Led Conferences has become a key interaction between student, teacher, and parents to both empower student agency as well as to de-mystify the educational experience of the students. Additionally, our annual Family Fun Night and Community School Forum allows us to engage our families in a fun and light-hearted way as well as a focused opportunity to get constructive feedback on a range of issues central to the life of the school. This event reinforces a sense of community in our school and gives families a sense of ownership in the future direction of the school. Data from the Framework for Great Schools Report 2016: -91% of parents and teachers feel the school does a good job with family outreach -85% of parents feel the school does a good job of involving parents Other sources of data: -75% of parents attended Student-Led Conferences for the 2015-16 school year Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, family attendance for Student-Led Conferences will increase from 75% to 95%. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents Sept. 2018 -June 2019  Monthly Family Newsletters with tips for ways to engage children in learning at home  Workshops addressing the school-home learning connection o District 4 workshop series o Learning Leaders workshops Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Grade-level team Teachers, Community School Director, District Family Coordinators Student-Led Conferences (SLCs) Family Fun Night and the Community School Forum    Back to school night orientation  Social media platforms Increase Family Communication: -School Messenger Parents Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Parent's Association -Send home flyers for school events (including PA meetings, SLCs, and other school events/functions) -Jupiter Grades -Social Media outreach -phone banking Create incentives fo parents to come to PA meetings and other school events Parents Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Monthly activities for parents and families Parents and students Sept. 2018-June 20189 -Parent's Association Meeting -Meetings with the Principal -Parent Workshops Principal, Parent Coordinator, Parent's Association, community School director Principal, Parent Coordinator, Parent's Association, Community School Director 3  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Leadership Program; The NYPD Youth Safety Officer; The New York Public Library; Union Settlement Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. As a Title I School-wide program school, Conceptual Consolidation will allow us to combine Federal and local funds such as Fair Student Funding (Tax Levy), Title I Funds, Title II Supplemental Funds and human resources to support system-wide implementation of enhanced family and community activities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019, Student Led Conferences attendance rates in prek-8th grade will be 92%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SLCs attendance tracker; The Data Sorter provided by the Office of Community Schools Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students scoring at Level 1 on NYS ELA test; Students reading below grade level as indicated on F&P Students that did not meet promotional criteria for 2016-17 Students scoring at Level 1 on NYS Science Test Students scoring at Level 1 on NYS ELA test; Students reading below grade level as indicated on F&P Students that are demonstrating at risk guidance supports. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) close reading of text, guided reading, workshop model, interactive writing, Fundations Good Math Response to Intervention Model, problem-solving through use of manipulatives, use of technology Inquiry-based approach to science workshop Use of differentiated texts and strategies to support needs od students (Cornell Notes and use of graphic organizers) Collaborative problem solving, individual and group counseling, mentoring Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Combination of small group, 1:1 tutoring, team teaching, push-in services Combination of small group, 1:1 tutoring, team teaching, push-in services Combination of small group, 1:1 tutoring, team teaching Combination of small group, 1:1 tutoring, team teaching When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Regular school day Regular school day Regular school day Regular school day Combination of small group, 1:1 tutoring, team teaching Regular school day 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 76 students who are Students in Temporary Housing ranging from PreK to 8th grade. Our numbers reflect the following: -45 students doubled up -26 students in shelter -5 students living in temporary living situation 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 6  As additional support for students in temporary housing we will ensure that identified students have uniform and supplies to support their learning. Additionally, Students in temporary housing who meet the criteria for AIS, will receive additional academic support to ensure their success. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. .N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. .N/A 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Administrators hire teachers with input from staff. Interviews and demonstration lessons by prospective candidates ensure that teachers with sound educational philosophy and pedagogical expertise will be hired. Teachers already on staff will engage in on-going professional development. Additionally, teachers will continue working with an instructional leader in their classrooms; observe model lessons; collaborate with each other, Principal and Assistant Principal in refining the Curriculum Frameworks and Pacing Calendar on each grade and aligning them with Common Core State Standards; attend workshops; and participate in study groups and/or book clubs. Model teacher, principal, and assistant principals provide support for new teachers through weekly conferences and classroom support. Leadership staff provides support and resources to assist all teachers with implementation of Danielson ‘Framework for Effective Teaching’ from the Department of Education. Leadership staff supports teachers with implementation of rigorous curriculum through professional development including Depth of Knowledge (DOK), increased student engagement, and questioning and discussion techniques. Administrative staff regularly attends hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly-qualified classroom teachers and specialists. We will continue to provide quality professional development through data driven instruction cycles; revising and refining our curriculum maps to ensure alignment to NYC and NYS standards; attending district and city workshops (for reading, writing, math, science, social studies, art, and music); inter-/intra school visits; attending science workshops offered by local institutions; and discussing strategies and curriculum planning in study groups (grade teams, content teams). Our school has developed relationships with Hunter College which have sent us a number of student teachers. We include student teachers in all educational activities and staff development, where possible, with the goal of recruiting highly qualified teachers who have training and whose philosophy is aligned with our school community. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). New teachers are encouraged to attend Department of Education Summer Training programs sponsored by the DOE. 8  All teachers (Pre-K to Grade 8 and Clusters) and paraprofessionals attend full day workshops in September, November and June focused on school goals. Classroom teachers and support specialists are provided with ongoing support through weekly professional development. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). PS/MS108 has one full day Pre-Kindergarten class within our Pre-K to Grade 8 school. Students in our Pre-Kindergarten program participate in regular science, music, movement and art programs similar to elementary students. They have access to a technology computer lab. Teacher meets monthly with administrators to discuss student progress and maintain portfolio data for each student. Parents of Pre-K students are encouraged to attend parent-teacher conferences. Students who are identified as in need receive special education services and/or ENL intervention. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction.  Teachers meet in grade level teams and academic discipline teams to review student data gathered from classwork, running records, interim assessments, city and state assessments, and performance-based assessments.  Teachers in grades K-5 administer running records and expect each student to increase a minimum of one reading level by January and an increase of a second reading level by June 2016.  Grade level teams work collaboratively to develop common performance-based assessments for each unit of study. Interdisciplinary teams in grades 7-8 meet weekly to review and align units of study and assessments. 9   Teachers will participate in ‘Learning Walks’ to observe colleagues with implementation of Danielson Framework.  Teachers will participate in inter-visitations with regard to implementation of best practices.  Teachers have option to select formal/informal observation format with teacher evaluation process. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 341,952.00 99,068 12,366.00 0 3,166,041.00 X X X X Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 13, 18, 20 13, 18 13, 18 13, 18, 20 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. 0  Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS/MS108, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS/MS108 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 3  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Creation and dissemination of a parent handbook including information for parents to know who to contact in the school, helpful websites for families and school rules and expectations. 4 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/MS108, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 5  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 6  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities 7  Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 8  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? School of authors entered into a Community School partnership for the 2018-19 school year. We are using parts of the 21st Century funding grant to support our math program. These resources will provide professional development on curriculum development for teachers and on-going coaching in math instructional strategies. The partnership is also administering a comprehensive after school program that provides enrichment activities as well as targeted tutoring for children identified as falling short of academic benchmarks. These are new programs and, thus, have not yet shown an impact on student performance. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. We expect that 200 students will spend minimally 30 hours each in the after school program. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? We expect that involvement in the after school program will support our goal of increasing attendance by 2% and increasing our State math scores by 20%. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership The Leadership Program Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Target Population 200 students in K-8 Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal After school program; coaching and professional development for math teachers Increase in math scores by 20%; increase in student attendance by 2% Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 9  The 21st Century grant will be used entirely to support the community school partnership including funding the contract with NTN to provide professional development in math instruction and Leadership Program to fund the salary of a Community School Director to run the after school program. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. We have hired a Community School Director who has taken charge of organizing the after school program. She is also a member of the school leadership cabinet which meets on a weekly basis. The CSD is also a non-voting member of the School Leadership Team (SLT). During the school day she meets with teachers and students to arrange additional programming and social-emotional supports. she also co-chairs the attendance committee and is a non-voting member of the School Leadership Team (SLT). Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 0  Community School meetings are embedded in the school leadership team meetings held weekly and include all administrators, the CSD, the Parent Coordinator, and the Dean of students. We will utilize the School Data Sorter as well as ATS reports and periodic assessment data to analyze patterns and trends in attendance and student academic progress. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The Leadership program hires staff trainers to facilitate the after school clubs and school-based pedagogues for after school tutoring. All teachers of mathematics have a common prep time either by subject in the middle school or in grade teams in the elementary school to focus on math instructional strategies with coaches from the NTN consultancy. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Our community School After school program will begin the first week of October and will conclude the last week of May of 2019. Math professional development and coaching will extend from September to April and culminate with a three full day training at the end of June. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 1 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: The Title III supplemental program will be held after school and on Saturdays. The first of our two after school programs will service MLLS students in grades 2, 3, 6, 7 and 8. Two teachers will facilitate this program, one for Elementary and one for Middle School. The after school program will focus on a community problem, an unsubstantial number of trash receptacles in our neighborhood. The students will base their research within 10 blocks of their school as compared to a 10 block radius of another school in a different neighborhood. The program will be held twice a week for two hours each session from December to May for approximately 30 sessions. program. On Wednesdays in January and February, from 2:30-4:30, the students will take community walks to take pictures, collect data and map the issue of trash in a 10 block radius of the school and compare it to a 10 block radius of a school in another location. 2nd and 3rd grade students will be in one group and 6th, 7th and 8th grade will be with another group. The groups will conduct the community walks together, having 2nd and 3rd graders paired with a middle school students. The students will create a presentation, letter of concern and plan of action. The presentation and letter will be sent to the councilperson representing East Harlem. During the program students will: · · · · · · acquisition&nbsp;skills.&nbsp; · persuasive essay to have more trash receptacles&nbsp;in their neighborhood.&nbsp; · The goal of the program is to promote a sense of advocacy and social justice while enhancing their academic English skills. The second program will be a Saturday program, held for 10 sessions to be facilitated by one ENL teacher and 6 students to be held for 3 hours each week. The program will focus on our expanding 7th and 8th grades MLLS as per the 2018 NYSESLAT. Students will be working with Little Bits to both introduce and enhance their coding and robotic skills. Students will work collaboratively, follow technical directions in English, and expand their Academic English into the fields of STEM. There is another program in the building therefore a supervisor will not need to be paid for by TItle III funds. Materials to be purchased through Title II funding include: 8 Little Bits Kits and Polaroid Film and additional learning materials. use question stems and and frames ro support question generation.&nbsp; sort questions into categories that are easier to identify.&nbsp; use KWL&nbsp;charts to capture what they already know about the topic.&nbsp; use visual aids to help build context for learning.&nbsp; take pictures to capture events that they will then use as data.&nbsp; work in groups and or pairs to and use discussion protocols top promote language use&nbsp; graphic organizers and sentence frames, students will use the data to write a create maps and charts to represent the data that was collected.&nbsp; 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Any additional monies needed to implement these programs will be obtained through other school funding sources. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: At P.S. 108, we will conduct workshops for our teachers of MLLS on site and have staff attend NYCDOE ENL PD sessions, including MLL Leads PLOs facilitated by MNBO Team. Our ENL certified teachers will attend the monthly workshops starting on November 17th. These monthly PDs are scheduled until June. Our entire staff with receive weekly PD on how you use data to drive their instruction. Title III program staff will participate in professional development activities which will enable them to work together to plan/design the curriculum topics and develop the instructional activities that best meet the needs of the ENLs in their classes. This development includes how to bring different learning modalities into the classroom, and how to ensure academic and content based vocabulary is being taught. The NYCDOE Specific Considerations for Teachers of ENLs PD document will be utilized as a resource and best practices by our staff. This document outlines specific questions for teachers to consider within the 4 Domains of Danielson's Framework as well as online resources which enable teachers to create learning environments that will support our CEP goals. Professional Development will center around Domain 3: Assessment Practices. . All staff who work with ENLs work together to incorporate learning activities that are designed to engage ENL students in their classes and advance them through the content, intentionally organize their instructional groups to support ENL student learning and produce clear and sequenced lesson ad unit structures to advance ENL students through their learning targets. During our biweekly special education meetings we will provide PD that addresses the needs of an ENL student with an IEP. This will include collaboration with the ENL teacher to create ELA goals. Professional Development Special Education Teachers k-8 4  Part C: Professional Development November 2018 2 Sessions 45 minutes- How are the needs of ENL students with a disabilities addressed in their IEPs? All Staff K-8 Monday 2018-19 PD time 8 sessions 2:45-3:50- Analyzing data and planning for small group instruction ENL teacher and Assistant Principal Monthly 2018-19 ENL workshops provided by the Manhattan Support Team These trainings will be of no cost to our school. Attendance will be monitored by the assistant principals at the conclusion of the PDs and then our secretary will file the attendance chronologically in the main office. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: We will conduct Parent Engagement workshops for parents of ELL students during the Parent Engagement time on Tuesdays. These workshops will address topics ranging from outlining the Special Education Evaluation Process to Understanding the Core Curriculum. Providers of these workshops will range from teachers to guest speakers. Parents will receive notification of these workshops through the school messenger system, letters sent home, as well as our school website where events are updated frequently. December: How do I support my child with this "new" math? January: What is the Reading Workshop Model? February: Internet Resources for ELA and Math Support at Home March: Getting your child ready for the NYSESLAT/Promotional Criteria for ELLs April-May- Promotional Criteria We also hold monthly PA meetings in the school to provide a forum for parents to share best practices, receive parenting skills, training, and information, as well as voice concerns. We also host workshops that outline the Middle/High School selection process, Understanding the Teenage Brain, Cyber-Bullying, Common Core Assessments DOE Parent Resources, and Internet Safety. We have found that as our ENLs reach the Middle School years their parents are having a difficult time understanding why their child's behavior has changed. These bilingual workshops help parents navigate through the Middle School years and encourage them to remain actively involved in their child's education. This academic year District 4 has scheduled monthly parent engagement/information sessions, which range in topics such as: The DOE Instructional Expectations, Special Education Reforms; ENLs, Preparing for for Parent Teacher Conferences, Promotional Policy, Assessments and Social and Emotional, and Summer School. These sessions support and reinforce the parent engagement focus of our Chancellor. Translators will be made available as requested by our parents. 5 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 04 School Name Assemblyman Angelo Del Toro Borough Manhattan School Number 108 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Rafael Gondim Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ramona Rovira Teacher/Subject Area Arabella Cintron Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Abigail Medina Superintendent Alexandra Estrella Assistant Principal Diana Patino, Jennifer Tegano Coach type here School Counselor Claudia Belloso Parent Miagdalena Sosa Parent Coordinator Adelina Murphy Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 5 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 596 7 Total number of ELLs 75 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.58%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use a variety of assessment tools to collect data and gain insight as to how we can improve the performance of our ELL students. Specifically, we assess their literacy skills by using Fountas and Pinnell levels using the TCRWP running records and comprehension tools as well as curriculum assessments from the ReadyGen K-2 and Expeditionary for Grades 3-8. In addition, we also use data from Performance series and the NYSESLAT exams. The above data helps us determine the reading, comprehension, and writing skills of our ELL students. Using this data, teachers drive their instruction by setting/planning long and short-term goals to help make the students successful. They also refer to it when planning to differentiate instruction and modify lessons accordingly. This data can also be used in revising curriculum maps, implementing project based assignments, and assessments. We believe the raised state standards and the change in format and scoring contributed to our ELLs scoring at levels 1 and 2. Our special education students were particularly affected by the changes in scoring as many of them received a level 1. Fortunately, our Math and Science scores were not greatly effected by the new raised standards and the majority of our 8  students did very well scoring level 3s and higher. Generally speaking, we have found that our Special Education ELLs struggle testing in the Commanding level on the NYSESLAT and generally are our Long term ELLs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our program by monitoring the proficiency of our English Language Learners from year to year. Our goal is to have our ELL students achieve fluency and/or proficiency on the NYSESLAT within 5 years. The programs that are currently in place for our ELL students are meeting the needs of our ELLs. 6 of our ELLs in grades 3-8 scored in the Commanding Level on the 2015 NYSESLAT vs 0 scoring a level of Proficient in 2014. We attribute this success to having highly qualified teachers with a strong foundation in ELL teaching strategies and methodologies contribute to the success of our program 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses the data to guide our instruction within the RTI Framework for grades K-8 by providing instruction that has strong Tier 1 strategies. Teachers plan and implement lessons that are vocabulary rich, discussion based, and provide multiple entry points for expanding oral language by building background, asking open ended questions, and discussion based projects. Teachers have word walls, use both student and teacher generated charts, and seizes opportunities to make connections both the community and their home lives. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In 2015 the NYSESLAT test changed its format. The new format resulted in 6 students scoring in the commanding level on the NYSESLAT vs 0 students in 2014 scoring Proficient on the test. The same number of students (39) scored in the Expanding level in 2015 and Advanced level in 2014. Of the 6 students who scored on the Entering Level, four of the students were SWDs in self-contained classes. The majority of Middle School ELLs scored in the Expanding level. Our Kindergarten ELLs also scored in the Transitioning and Expanding levels. this can be attributed to an early childhood program grounded in phonics and basic language skills. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). 9  a. Freestanding ENL program. P.S. 108 utilizes a freestanding ENL program to service our ELL students for grades K-8. For the 2015-2016 school year, students are grouped according to their proficiency level. Students scoring in the Entering or Emerging levels will receive standalone as well as integrated ENL instruction in ELA. Students scoring in the Transitioning – Commanding levels will receive integrated ENL in ELA and/or content area. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering Level students will receive 360 minutes (180 in Standalone ENL and 180 of Integrated ENL in ELA), Emerging students (180 in Standalone ENL and 180 of Integrated ENL in ELA, 90 minutes Integrated ENL in ELA or any other content area or Standalone), Transitioning will receive 180 minutes (90 minutes Integrated ENL in ELA and 90 minutes Integrated ENL in other content area or Standalone), Expanding will receive 180 minutes (Integrated ENL in ELA or any other content area ) Commanding will receive 90 minutes (Integrated ENL in ELA or any other content area ) 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content areas are taught in English using ELL methodologies, such as SIOP. Teachers aim to help students acquire English Language proficiency in the areas of listening, speaking, reading, writing and critical thinking to scaffold content and language learning. Graphic organizers, exposure of academic vocabulary, and visuals are used to support ELLs in the content area. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? While we do not currently have a Dual Language program, we would allow our students to use Fountas and Pinnell in their native language, we would administer assessments in their home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. We currently have 0 SIFE students admitted at our school. We will develop an action plan to meet the needs of this student by having the ESL teacher work intensively with the student in their native language. We would begin by building the child phonemic awareness in their native language using the ESTRELLTA program. This plan will allow the child to begin to transfer second language acquisition. Role-playing, songs, picture books, and incorporating manipulatives in lessons will provide ample opportunities for the child to acquire basic skills in both native and second language. All teachers of this child will be informed of the best practices in ensuring that the student is successful. Outreach programs with community organizations to support the family in the transition to school. b. Our school immerses our newcomer ELL students in the English language. Ms. R uses methodologies in academic content area instruction to develop English language skills. The ESL program aims to help students acquire English language proficiency in the areas of listening speaking, reading, writing and critical thinking to make content more accessible for the ELL student. Ms. R targets areas of concentration for newcomers as phonics, blending, and fluency. As ELA testing is mandated after one year for newcomers, teachers of ELLs focus on Reading comprehension skills and strategies throughout the day through differentiation. Teachers use Fountas and Pinnell levels to determine a child’s reading level and have a very structures 0  Independent Reading period where they conference with students individually and set appropriate goals for reading. Teachers also group students using varied criteria throughout the day in the content areas to work on projects, workshop, and research projects. c. We continue to service our ELLs who have received service for four to six years by providing continuous support through our AIS programs such as Early Risers, Extended Day, and Saturday Academy. Teachers of ELLs focus on Reading comprehension skills and strategies throughout the day through differentiation. Teachers use Fountas and Pinnell levels to determine a child’s reading level and have a very structures Independent Reading period where they conference with students individually and set appropriate goals for reading. Reading and Math workshops models allow teachers to differentiate content for ELLs in their classrooms. As ELLs are required to test after one year, they are exposed to focused test preparation, which includes simulations, lessons on how to answer extended response questions, and vocabulary enrichment. This allows ELL students to become comfortable and familiar with the test format. All ELLs receive extended time and testing modifications in compliance with Testing Administration guidelines. Teachers also group students using varied criteria throughout the day in the content areas to work on projects, workshop, and research projects. d. We continue to service our ELLs who have completed six years of service by providing continuous support through our AIS programs as well as our extra curricular activities such as Early Risers, Extended Day, and Saturday Academy. Teachers of ELLs focus on Reading comprehension skills and strategies throughout the day through differentiation. Teachers use Fountas and Pinnell levels to determine a child’s reading level and have a very structures Independent Reading period where they conference with students individually and set appropriate goals for reading. Reading and Math workshops models allow teachers to differentiate content for ELLs in their classrooms. As ELLs are required to test after one year, they are exposed to focused test preparation, which includes simulations, lessons on how to answer extended response questions, and vocabulary enrichment. This allows ELL students to become comfortable and familiar with the test format. All ELLs receive extended time and testing modifications in compliance with Testing Administration guidelines. Teachers also group students using varied criteria throughout the day in the content areas to work on projects, workshop, and research projects. e. We continue to service our former ELLs in years 1 and 2 after testing proficient by providing continuous support through our AIS programs as well as our extra curricular activities such as Early Risers, Extended Day, and Saturday Academy. Teachers of former ELLs focus on Reading comprehension skills and strategies throughout the day through differentiation. Teachers use Fountas and Pinnell levels to determine a child’s reading level and have a very structures Independent Reading period where they conference with students individually and set appropriate goals for reading. Reading and Math workshops models allow teachers to differentiate content for ELLs in their classrooms. Former ELLs receive extended time and testing modifications in compliance with Testing Administration guidelines. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our special needs ELL students receive the mandated instruction for their level of English language proficiency as well as any mandated services/instruction as indicated on their IEP i.e. SETSS, Counseling, Speech, OT/PT. Our literacy programs (ReadyGen K-2, Expeditionary grades 3-8) and GoMath (K-5) CMP3 (6-8) come with supplemental resources for ELL-SWDs that simplify the material, build vocabulary, and provide context clues and background information. These materials are on grade-level. They incorporate vocabulary enrichment, reading comprehension, visual and audio support, as well as technological components that allow for ELL-SWDs to reinforce vocabulary skills and strategies taught by honing in on tactile, visual, and auditory learning styles. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Aligning the Core Curriculum with the goals as set forth in the ELL-SWDs IEP helps meet their diverse needs. All students placed in an ESL (English as a Second Language) Program will receive instruction in English only, using intensive ESL methodology. Teachers utilize strategies such as: simplifying the input, providing context clues, drawing on prior knowledge, providing opportunities for group work, using materials for hands-on work, and assessing all students. Teachers of ELLs differentiate instruction to provide ELL students with the interventions they need during the day in content areas. The ELL students are invited to AIS programs that are held after the regular school day such as After School, and Saturday Academy 1  where small group instruction takes place. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs requiring additional academic interventions are invited to attend afterschool and Saturday programs. The programs provide modified small group instruction. Programs are designed with content specific focuses i.e. writing, math, reading. English as a Second Language students receive instruction in English only, using intensive ESL methodology. These approaches utilize strategies such as: simplifying text, providing context clues, drawing on prior knowledge, providing opportunities for group work, using materials for hand-on work, and assessing all students. Teachers use guided and shared reading across the content areas to service ELLs. In Science and Social Studies, will provide students with grade appropriate texts in the content area with the scaffolds needed to support their linguistics development. Graphic organizers, word walls, and visuals in the content areas will enable ELLs to access the information at multiple enrty points. Students needing native language support can have access to glossaries and computers to support their learning of the content in their native language. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? To support our ELLs have access to on-line programs such as iReady Reading and Math, Book, Brain POP/ Brain POP ESL! that will enhance and support our ELLs and their families both at home and at school. They allow ELL students to reinforce skills and strategies taught in class in fun formats. Students are given the opportunity to work at their own pace building their vocabulary, reinforcing skills and strategies taught in class, having books read to them modeling fluency and expression. All grades have access to Mac Books that can be used to further differentiate lessons, provide enrichment or review for ELLs. These laptops allow students access to programs in class, as well as completing online assessments that are specific to the students’ needs.We will also be using the Academic Vocabulary Toolkit with our Middel School ells to support language development and aquistion. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded access to all school programs. ELL students requiring additional academic interventions receive invitations to all of our school programs aimed at providing intervention for struggling ELL students for Afterschool and the Saturday Academy. Some of our Afterschool programs and Saturday Academy classes are also specifically designed to target our ELL students and are taught by the certified ESL teacher, Ms. R using proven ELL instructional methodology. Notifications are delivered to parents in their native language. Our Parent Coordinator, Mrs. M, is made available to translate and explain if necessary. Extra curricular programs (Jeremy’s Heroes, Flag Football, Mock Trial) hold open registration. Students are invited by letter and if they are interested try-out alongside other students and if they are accepted begin the program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our school uses a variety of materials to modify instruction for ELLs. Each of our literacy programs (ReadyGen and Expeditionary) comes with supplemental resources for ELLs that simplify the material, build vocabulary, and provide context clues and background information. Ms. R also uses Words their Way to support Phonics and Decoding skills and strategies for ELL students. For our longterm Middle school ELLs we will also use the Academic Vocabulary Toolkit to build vocabulary skills. Additionally, every classroom in grades K-8 is equipped with a SMART board that provides interactive audio and visual support to the teachers and students. Through a RESO-A Grant ELLs in grades 3-8 have access to laptops as a tool to enhance learning. ELLs in Grade 8 also have access to laptops through iLearn grant and Special Education self-contained students in grades 5 and 8 have laptops carts that can be used to enhance and support their learning. 3 classes utilize document cameras to aid ELLs in instruction. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 2  Native language support can be given in many ways in the different classrooms. Glossaries, dictionaries, and materials (electronic or hard copy) in the native languages represented by ELLs are available in the classrooms, teachers who are able to provide support to students during the school day in the content areas with translations, as needed, visuals, and ample opportunities for hand-on learning. Peer support with students of the same language for certain activities can also provide native language support. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The required support services support and resources that are provided to ELLs are grade and age appropriate. Support services and resources are carefully chosen by the teachers and ESL teacher to ensure that students’ needs are met across the grade levels and abilities. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school uses a variety of materials to modify instruction for ELLs. Each of our literacy programs (ReadyGen and Expeditionary) comes with supplemental resources for ELLs that simplify the material, build vocabulary, and provide context clues and background information. Ms. R also uses Words their Way to support Phonics and Decoding skills and strategies for ELL students. For our longterm Middle school ELLs we will also use the Academic Vocabulary Toolkit to build vocabulary skills. Additionally, every classroom in grades K-8 is equipped with a SMART board that provides interactive audio and visual support to the teachers and students. Through a RESO-A Grant ELLs in grades 3-8 have access to laptops as a tool to enhance learning. ELLs in Grade 8 also have access to laptops through iLearn grant and Special Education self-contained students in grades 5 and 8 have laptops carts that can be used to enhance and support their learning. 3 classes utilize document cameras to aid ELLs in instruction. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). PS 108 hosts an orientation day for newly enrolled ELLs in K and 6th grade before school starts. Families are invited to tour the school, meet the teacher, and meet other families. This allows for families to acquaint themselves with the school and the other families in a comfortable setting. In September, we host Curriculum night for all families to come to the school to meet teachers, review curriculum, and tour the school. In both instances, Ms. M, Parent Coordinator is available to discuss school resources that are available to the families. Weekly Parent meeting are held to discuss pertinent information for all families. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 3  1) The Professional Development plan for all ELL personnel at the school will be held during 3 distinct times throughout the year. This professional development will occur for 80 minutes afterschool on a Monday as per UFT Collective bargaining. The following are the topics to be covered: a. New CR Part 154 mandates and implementation b. Implementation of the Bilingual Common Core Progressions c. SIOP Strategies d. Using Data to Drive Instruction for ELLs : At P.S. 108, we will conduct workshops for our teachers of ELLs. The teachers will work together to plan/design the curriculum topics and develop the instructional activities that best meet the needs of the ELLs. Training will be made available to all ELL staff. Teachers will be afforded opportunities to discuss current research, best practices, materials, NYS-ESL standards, instructional strategies and alignment to core curriculum and the application of Core Knowledge. Teachers will be informed of Testing Modifications and best practices afforded to ELLs in efforts to ensure success. Teachers of ELLs will be exposed to the ELL Identification process and the importance of NYSESLAT Testing. The format and best practices will be discussed and explained so ELLs will have a better opportunity to move through the modalities with progress 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Guidance counselors attend professional development sessions which detail and outline the process for middle and high school applications. These workshops support the guidance counselor in supporting students with choices that best meet their needs. We will conduct workshops for our teachers, service providers (counselors, OT/PT, speech, SETSS, S.A.T. members) administrators of ELLs. These staff members will be afforded opportunities to discuss current research, best practices, materials, NYS-ENL standards, instructional strategies and alignment to core curriculum and the application of Core Knowledge. Staff will be informed of Testing Modifications and best practices afforded to ELLs in efforts to ensure success. Teachers and service providers of ELLs will be exposed to the ELL Identification process, the importance of NYSESLAT Testing and its impact on ELL-SWDs. The format and best practices will be discussed and explained so ELLs will have a better opportunity to move through the modalities with progress. Agendas and attendance will be kept in a binder as record keeping in the Mian Office. The Professional Development plan for all ELL personnel at the school will be held during 3 distinct times throughout the year. This professional development will occur for 80 minutes afterschool on a Monday as per UFT Collective bargaining. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school will provide annual individual meetings on or about October/November. The purpose of this meeting will be to discuss student language acquisition progress, NYSESLAT/NYSITELL results, and language development needs in the content areas. The ENL teacher and/or classroom teacher can meet with families during parent engagement time, via phone call/email, or any other mutually convenient time. Translation services can be secured for these meetings through the Translation and Interpretation Unit over the phone support, family advocates, and available staff members. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental Involvement is strong. Parents are encouraged to join class celebrations sharing their culture, foods, and talents. Parents are often seen in participating in these celebrations as well as contributing to fund raisers and activities such as Spirit Day. Parent Association Activities such as the Harvest Festival provide a forum for ELLs as well as their parents to 4  socialize and volunteer. Weekly parent workshops provide ELL families with support and resources to help them better understand the changes in education and how they can support at home. When possible school staff provides translation at the events. The Parent Coordinator also organizes parent Workshops both in the school and outside of the school. She will travel with parents to workshops that are held at locations other than PS 108. She organizes give-a-aways for families who attend workshops and encourages parents to “bring a friend” to the next workshop. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Rafael Gondim, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Assemblyman Angelo de Toro School DBN: 04M108 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Rafael Gondim Title Principal Diana Patino Assistant Principal Adelina Murphy Parent Coordinator Ramona Rovira ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Abigail Medina Teacher/Subject Area Arabella Cintron Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Claudia Belloso School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/30/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 04M108 School Name: PS/MS Superintendent: Estrella The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. PS 108 uses data collected from the HLIS and ATS as well as teacher surveys to determine the native language needs of the school. During parent teacher conferences we try to pair bilingual teacher with monolingual teachers for translation. We encourage teachers to use the DOE telephone translation services as well as google translate to communicate with families. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 8 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spanish English Bengali Arabic Chinese Manadrin Wolof Cantonese We currently have a school created document which lists ELLs and the home language. We can begin to expand this document to include all students and families. This will enable PS 108 to communicate with all families. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? The documents that the school typically disseminates every year whch require translation are: Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 9  -Parent newletters- Monthly - Teacher welcome packets- beginning of the year - Testing calendars- ongoing - Flyers for Parent Workshops- ongoing - Parent teacher conference times- September, November, March, For -Parent Welcome packets we can begin to submit translation requests beginning at the end of June. This will enable that the turn around time is met by the first day of school. -Flyers for parent workshops we can use Google translate to translate these workshops for parents. -PTC conference and Testing calendars can be distributed already translated from DOE templates. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Face -to-face ,meetings that will typically have at the school are as follows: -Informal interactions *conversations at dismissal, *phone calls to the parent * notes home to the parent to inform of a special event, class happenings, behavior, homework 0  * calls of introduction at the beginning of the year * Parents who come into the office with concerns and questions i.e. dropping off items to their child, Metrocards -Formal interactions * Parent teacher conferences * Curriculum Night *IEP/Annual meetings *Meetings with parents over concerns- (Parent Engagement Time/Scheduled meetings) * Parent Association Meetings * Parent Workshops * Registration/ Discharges 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 1  PS 108 will provide parents with a copy of the Parents Bill of Rights and Responsibilities in their native language. We will also post in the main entrance a sign that downloaded from the DOE of the availablity of translation and interpretation services. Posters and the number to the the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be provided to the Teachers so that they may utilize the service if they need to. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Feedback will be gathered from parents through informal conversations and parent surveys. We can begin to consider using online survey systems to gather feedback from our families about the quality and availiablity of services. Parent surveys can also be distributed to families throughout the year in their native langauge to further assess quality. 2 
