 05M133 School Name: P.S. 133 FRED R MOORE Principal: NAZDA PALCHIK-MEDINA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Section 1: School Information Page School Information Fred R. Moore Academy 05M133 00 Pre-K, K, 1 st , 2 nd , 3 rd , 4 th , 5 th 2121 5 th Ave, NY, NY 10037 212-690-5936 School Number (DBN): 212-690-5939 Fax: School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: NazdaPalchik-Medina nmedina5@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: NazdaPalchik-Medina Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Kelvin Almonte SoniaMendoza Parents’ Association President: NazdaPalchik-Medina / Sonia Mendoza SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Danielle Sullivan N/A N/A Geographical District: 05 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Danika Rux Superintendent: 425 West 123 rd Street, NY, NY 10027 DRux@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-769-7500 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: 212-769-7619 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 Seventh Ave, 8 th Floor, NY,NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name NazdaPalchik-Medina Kelvin Almonte SoniaMendoza N/A Danielle Sullivan N/A N/A N/A Lissette Johnson DellySuazo Sean Forte Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Briana Tanzer AshleyShapiro Nicole Tatum Hall Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Parent N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? P.S. 133 is a Pre-K to 5th grade school consisting of 224 students. The mission of the Fred R. Moore Academy is to provide a rigorous and safe learning community where students will be challenged to achieve academic excellence in all curriculum areas. Our goal is to meet the individual needs of all students and prepare them to compete in the future as we provide them with the skills and habits of effective people. This will be achieved through collaboration between parents, teachers, administration and the community.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 133 has a collaboration with Harlem Boys and Girls Club (HBGC). HBGC provides our students with additional supports aligned to The Framework for Great Schools. HBGC staff support students academically and socially. They provide additional supports during communal events, incentives for attendance and other PBIS recognitions, as well as after-school initiatives and programs. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The P.S. 133 Horizon Program serves students in grades K-5. The Horizon program provides students on the Autism Spectrum with the opportunity to be educated in a community school while providing them with the individual and specialized instruction and supports they need to be successful academically, emotionally and socially. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The Framework for Great Schools elements, Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teachers have been the areas of focus throughout the last years. Our students have demonstrated growth in the area of Student Progress due to our emphasis on the Common Core Learning Standards and the adjustments made to our curriculum for all subject areas. Currently, we continue to enhance instruction by embedding the Core Ready Units of Study and Eureka Math into our curriculum. We are also enhancing our curriculum to provide students with explicit, standard-based instruction which will provide students with opportunities to ‘make their thinking visible.’ The key areas of focus based on The Framework for Great Schools for this school year are Effective School Leadership and Rigorous Instruction. As a school community, data has been analyzed and triangulated to provide us with the 2018-2019 Power Standards and additional focus areas for teaching and learning. Our findings call for a specific focus on student-centered learning, mathematical discourse and developing specific and individualized student goals based on data. As a school community, we will continue to engage in professional cycles of work that will focus on understanding standards, and learning progressions, differentiated instruction, and intervention strategies such as guided reading and guided math. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 05M133 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 211 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 52 52 21 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 12 21 21 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 90.5% % Reduced Lunch 10.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 42.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.08 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 21.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 63% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 14 13 21 89.6% 2.4% 37.0% 48.3% 2.8% 1.4% 4 0% 7.1 10.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the feedback from the 2017 Quality Review, the school must continue to enhance our curriculum to ensure high-levels of student engagement and rigor in the classroom. We have identified the following areas of focus: 1. According to the 2016-2017 School Quality Review, P.S.133 received Developing, specifically on component 1.1 Ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards. 2. According to the 2017-2018 New York State Assessments, 27% of 3rd graders, 22% of 4th graders, and 19% of 5th graders met the State Standards on the English Language Arts exam. 3. According to the 2017-2018 New York State Assessments, 9% of 3rd graders, 3% of 4th graders, and 23% of 5th graders met the State Standards on the Math State exam. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of June 2019, 20% of testing students will demonstrate progress as evidenced in an increase of at least one performance level as measured by the New York State ELA exam. Similarly, by the end of June 2018, 25% of testing students will demonstrate progress as evidenced in an increase of at least one performance level as measured by the New York State Math exam. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration Teachers Support Staff  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implementation of the Core Ready Reading and Writing Units of Study, NYC Passport to Social Studies, Amplify Science and Eureka Math curriculum. This will provide staff with a streamlined implementation of NY common core standards and aligned assessment criteria. Students will be assessed using the Reading DIBELS and iReady Diagnostic assessments. Dibels reading assessment will be conducted 5 times a year (3 benchmark assessments in October 2018, February 2019 and Jun 2019 as well as 2 progress monitoring assessments in December 2018 and April 2019). iReady assessments will be conducted three times a year. The beginning of year data will be utilized to modify the curriculum focus for the school year. Data will also be used to design learning centers and small group instruction. Teachers and administration will engage in common planning to ensure consistency and norm expectations. Staff will engage in professional development learning cycles, learning walks, common planning meetings, and inter-visitations to ensure the implementation of the initiatives around “making thinking visible,” “learning centers,” “guided reading,” “guided math” and providing students with quality feedback. The schools Collaborative Action Research Planning (CARP) vertical team will: All students grades K-5 September 2018 to June 2019. September and October 2018; February 2019. September 2018 to June 2019 3  * work to develop protocols to guide teachers’ analysis of student data and student work; * pilot the use of the protocols to test their effectiveness and develop their individual skills in using the protocols; and * refine protocols for presentation to staff. Student work and data analysis protocols will be developed, piloted and used to facilitate teacher student work and data analysis. This should be fully implemented by the CARP team by May 23, 2019. Incorporate interventions strategies such as “Think Sheets”, ‘Making Thinking Visible Think Maps’ to support students with disabilities, English Language Learners and high-need support students. March 2019 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 Teachers and students, including those with IEPs, ELLs as well as Tier 2 and 3 RTI students Administration and Teachers School leaders will make sure that all teachers provide extension activities for students who complete work quickly in lessons by: May 2019 to June 2019 * establishing a clear expectation that lesson plans include at least one extension activities that will provide additional challenge and learning support for students who complete work quickly; and * making sure that teachers implement planned extension activities to enable students to deepen and extend their learning during lessons. School leaders will check teachers’ compliance with these expectations during lesson plan reviews and walkthrough classroom visits. Administration Teachers Support Staff Administration Teachers Support Staff 4 Teachers and Paraprofessionals September 2017 to June 2018 Administration Teachers Support Staff Fundations strategies in the primary level (K-2) are implemented daily in the classroom. Grades 3-5 will implement the RACE strategy (Restate, Answer, Cite, and Explain) as a tool to improve writing. For math, problem solving, visual representation strategies, and math games will be implemented throughout the building. Teachers will engage in a multi-tiered professional development approach. Tier I- All teachers will engage in professional learning opportunities in the building. This includes: a) Math Professional Development Days based on math centers, including guided math and data-driven math games (two staff developers: Southern Cross Consultancy and Algebra for All-Bank Street College); b) Monday Extended Time- Professional development opportunities around guided reading and literacy centers; c) Universal Literacy Coach and Instructional Coach will provide professional development opportunities around literacy instruction and building a toolkit of resources for all teaching staff. Tier II- Targeted Professional Development for specific groups of teachers. This includes: a) Horizon Coaching Sessions (once/twice a week); b) SESIS SPED Coaching for non-Horizon teachers (once a week); c) District 5 Literacy PLOs for Grade 3 teachers (8 sessions); d) ICT PLOs targeting collaboration between SPED teacher and Content Area teacher; e) Early Childhood Instructional and Social-Emotional Coaching Sessions (once a week); ELL Series (8 sessions); SPED Series (8 sessions). Tier III- Intensive Professional Development Intervention. This includes coach-led “Individualized Cycles of Work” for TIP teachers and selected staff whose overall 2017-2018 MOTP rating was under the category of “Developing” or “Ineffective.” 5 Teachers attending outside professional development will turn-key the information to their colleagues and collaborate to implement consistent and high-quality practices throughout the building. As a way to build a professional learning community, modeling sessions from professional development cycles of work will take place in the classroom/lab sites. Selected staff will be asked to conduct intervisitations as a way to support professional growth in the building. Provide teachers with professional learning time with the support of the Instructional coach to ensure an understanding of curriculum outcomes and expectations. Formal and informal observations with timely and actionable feedback that includes the necessary support needed to meet expectations as measured by the Danielson's Framework for Teaching. Teachers Teachers Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Administration and Support Staff (coaches) September 2018 to June 2019 Administration and Support Staff (coaches) October 2018 to May 2019 Administration and Support Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be provided with monthly supports specific to curriculum strategies and classroom instruction. Parents will be able to experience first hand classroom lessons and strategies with their children focused on Reading and Math lessons. Family Math Game Nights will be scheduled to introduce parents to the learning that is taking place in the classroom. The expectations is that students will be able to take math games home in order to reinforced skills learned in the classroom. Parents will also be invited to Monthly Open Houses to support their understanding of curriculum expectations and outcomes. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Administration, Teachers and Parent Coordinator; Southern Cross Consultants Instructional Resources: Core Ready Reading and Writing Units of Study and Trade Books; Eureka Curriculum materials 6  Schedule Adjustments: Scheduled teacher team meetings during Monday extended time, parent meetings and provide substitute teachers for professional development days Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress Monitoring: All students will be benchmark assessed with our DIBELS and iReady assessments. Targeted students will be assessed with the progress monitoring tools. By January 2019, 100% of our students in the testing grades will utilize the RACE writing strategy on a daily basis. By January 2019, 100% of our students will engage in guided reading and guided math groups. By January 2019, 100% of our students will participate in learning centers in the classroom. By June 2019, 50% of our teachers will show improvement in components 1e and 3c as evident in Advance MOTP data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instruments of measurement will be the DIBELS Reading and Math assessments, iReady Reading and Math assessments, student notebooks and student portfolios. Additionally, we will utilize the pre and post assessments for each unit of study. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the feedback from the 2017-2018 School Learning Environment Survey , the school must continue to work on the implementation of a social-emotional program in the building. We have identified the following areas of focus:  61% of pre-k through 5 teachers say that discipline is applied to students fairly in their school.  50% of teachers say that adults at their school have access to school-based supports to assist in behavioral and emotional escalations.  72% of teachers say that adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be a 10% increase from 61% to 71% as measured by the NYC School Learning Environment Survey as it relates to teachers that say that discipline is applied to students fairly in our school building. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). PS 133 has been selected to partnered with the RSE-TASC team which focuses on the development of multi-tiered systems of behavior and academic support plans to improve the results of social emotional growth of students in our school building. This is a two year commitment that encompasses the formation of a school-based team in charge of developing a support plan as well as a crisis-intervention ladder system that teachers can use to have access to school-based supports to assist in behavioral and emotional escalations. The Leader in Me will be utilized as a school-wide approach to support all students with their own character development and behavior. To further promote a positive environment for student learning, we will focus on supporting students with maintaining positive and proactive attitudes and relationships, self-regulate their actions and “Begin with the End in Mind.” We will continue to engage students by ensuring that each student has developed their own goals and action plans. Students will track their own progress and reflect on their growth. Additionally, paraprofessionals and teachers will provide students with the strategies to ensure that the 7 Habits (LIM) are internalized. Teaching staff, students September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, teachers, paraprofessionals, school counselors. Teaching staff, students September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, teachers, parent coordinator, school counselors. Understanding the need of a PBIS approach, administration hired a second school counselor that will be in charge of the implementation of recognition systems for positive character development and behavior in our building. This includes: Students September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Guidance Counselors. a) Student of the Month Certificate: This will provide recognition of students based on academics, including most improved. A bulletin board for public recognition will be located in the first floor of the building. 9  b)Leader in Me Award: This will provide a focus on celebrating and acknowledging student positive behavior on a monthly basis. A bulletin board for public recognition will be located in the first floor of the building for monthly winners. Moreover, each grade level will be assigned to a display bulletin board that will feature student work representing one of the seven habits. Within PS 133’s PBIS approach, students with perfect attendance will be recognize on a monthly basis with a Perfect attendance certificate. Parents of those students with perfect attendance will receive a letter to recognize the important role they play in their child’s attendance. Students September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Attendance Teacher A "Student in Temporary Housing" (STH) Coordinator will work closely with those in such situation. The STH Coordinator will review these students' attendance as well as their academic and social-emotional growth. STH Coordinator will also ensure STH students receive the instructional supplies they need to be successful in the classroom. Most importantly, the STH Coordinator will build trustworthy relationships with parents so and will function as a liaison between families and the school. One of our goals is to have 40% of our teaching staff trained in restorative practices (city initiative) by the end of the school year. School Counselors, Parent Coordinator and Student in Temporary Housing Coordinator will attend monthly trainings around school climate and student social-emotional growth. Identification of specific students for targeted interventions based on behavior and emotional needs will be conducted throughout cycles and needs assessments. Once identified, conduct sheets will be utilized as an intervention to support students that need additional supports to achieve positive behavior and character development. Teachers and paraprofessionals November 2018 to June 2019 Administration Students November 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Guidance Counselors The participation in meaningful enrichment programs during the day such as dance, visual arts, and robotics as well as in the after school program such as basketball and softball will serve as a motivational tool for student positive behavior and ensure consistent academic progress. Students December 2019 to June 2019 Administration, After School Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 0  Parent Workshops to ensure parents are familiar with the Leader in Me habits will provide them with the opportunities to implement similar language and concepts to promote student character development. These workshops will be provided monthly by administration, parent coordinator, guidance counselors and teachers. Parent-School Interaction Log will keep records of attendance, positive reinforcement, disruptions, and informative interactions between teachers and staff members. Teachers in the Horizon program will send home "communication logs" three times a week. For those students with Tier 2 intervention, conduct sheets will be sent home for parent signature. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Administration, Guidance Counselors, Teachers, Parents Instructional resources: certificates, awards, bulletin boards, incentives Schedule adjustments: Monday extended Time, per-session RSE-TASC team meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. By December 2018, a TASC team will be formed and a PBIS Behavior Matrix will be in place. 2. Attendance Data will be discussed and analyzed during attendance meetings. 3. Perfect Attendance, Student of the Month and Leader in Me bulletin boards will be updated monthly. 4. Tracking and analysis of the all incidents and occurrences will be conducted on a monthly basis by utilizing the OORS system. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1. Attendance Data 2. OORs data 3. School-wide survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the feedback from the 2017-2018 School Learning Environment Survey , administration must continue to work on building a professional learning community, specifically in the area of providing teachers with opportunities to work collaboratively with their colleagues in and outside of the school building. We have identified the following areas of focus:  88% of teachers say that at their school the principal, teachers, and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively.  88% of teachers say that their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas.  81% of teachers say that they had opportunities to work productively with colleagues at their school on professional development.  62% of teachers say that they had opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools on professional development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, there will be a 10% increase from 81% to 91% as measured by the NYC School Learning Environment Survey as it relates to the teachers that say they had opportunities to work productively with colleagues at their school on professional development. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? For the 2018-2019 school year, teacher teams will continue to collaborate with administrators and support staff to ensure consistent and clear communication of goals. To support collaboration among teachers administration will provide: Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teacher Leaders, Support Staff a) Math learning opportunities around content development, differentiated instruction, math centers, and guided math. To help us in this process, the school is hiring a Math staff developer from recognized Southern Cross Consultancy for the implementation of ten professional development sessions in the building. During this time, teachers will meet in bridge teams to unpack standards, build content knowledge, and develop a toolkit of resources that they can use to differentiate instruction in the classroom. In addition, Bank Street College Math Developers partnered with NYC DOE Algebra for ALL initiative, will work with 3rd and 4th grade teachers to develop content knowledge through the implementation of inquiry lessons and the use of manipulatives. b) Horizon Special Education weekly meetings for teachers, school based support team providers, counselors and paraprofessionals to collaboratively conduct case studies around social-emotional growth and instructional goals. c) Weekly sessions with the Special Education School Improvement Specialist (S.E.S.I.S) to support teachers with evidence based instructional practices in the areas of literacy, behavior and specially designed instruction to improve outcomes of our students with disabilities. During this time, teachers work collaboratively to develop differentiated activities and learn about intervention reading programs such as Recipe for Reading and Wilson Intensive Intervention Program. 3  d) Monthly sessions with Brian Green, Consultant hired by Community District 5 to develop literacy pedagogy for Grade 3 teachers in the district. During this sessions, teachers have the opportunity to work collaboratively with colleagues from other schools in the district to hone in literacy skills and strategies that will help students improve in reading and writing. e) Other professional development opportunities that will allow selected staff to collaborate with colleagues from other schools include monthly ELL series, ICT PLO series, SPED conferences, Fundations training, and Great Leaps workshops. f) Opportunities for staff to work in cycles with assigned Universal Literacy coach. During these sessions, teachers will work collaboratively to plan Guided Reading lessons, participate in teacher practice sessions with students, and give each other feedback after Guided Reading inter-visitations are conducted. CARP weekly meetings will provide opportunities for teachers to work collaboratively in 8 inquiry cycles around math centers, guided math and the development of standard-based activities for all grade levels based on DIBELS, iReady, and other classroom data. Teacher Teams will meet weekly during common planning time to work collaborative in the implementation of inquiry protocols to look at student work and plan cycles of intervention in the classroom. Administration will provide opportunities for school to school visits, such as Showcase School visits and other schools in the city. Similarly, P.S. 133 will partner this year with P.S. 25X Horizon school in the Bronx. Through this partnership, teachers will visit partner school, discuss good practices, reflect on their craft, and plan action plans that can be implemented in the classroom. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, CARP team, Support Staff Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teacher Leaders, Support Staff Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Support Staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Parent Workshops will be provided based on the learning teachers and support staff are acquiring during scheduled professional development cycles. 4  CARP Team presentation to keep staff updated on the progress of the team and the implementation of the action plan. P.S.133 will implement monthly PACT time. PACT time stands for Parent and Child Together, which will provide teachers, families and students with the opportunity to engage in curriculum specific activities. Family Game Nights to teach parents about ways to reinforce math concepts at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Substitute Teachers and paraprofessionals provide coverage for professional development conferences, Southern Cross Consultants hired to provide Math Center training, Universal Literature coach provides Guided Reading training Instructional Resources: Key Links Guided reading resources, Reading A to Z reading resources, data from iReady and DIBELS Math and ELA Schedule: Common Planning periods, Collaborative Professional Learning Mondays, Teacher Team Mondays, after-school meetings, classroom intervisitation schedules Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Collaborative teachers progress monitoring will be conducted through consistent monitoring of teacher team meetings and protocol supports. Teachers will provide feedback through an in house survey to show the response to collaborative efforts. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will be an in house survey utilizing questions aligned to the NYC School Survey. iReady and Dibels data Advance Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the feedback from the 2017-2018 School Learning Environment Survey , administration must continue to work on providing opportunities for distributive leadership in the building, particularly in the areas of teacher voice and influence. We have identified the following areas of focus:  30% of teachers say that they have influence over the selection of instructional materials used in the classroom.  46% of teachers say that they have influence over the development of instructional materials.  64% of teachers say that they have influence over standards for student behavior. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019 there will be a 20% increase from 46% to 66% as measured by the NYC School Learning Environment Survey as it relates to the teachers that say they have influence over the development of instructional materials in our school. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development and per-session after school and Saturday meetings will be scheduled to collaboratively develop curriculum maps, scope and sequence documents and pacing calendars. Professional development provided by ASD Horizon allows teachers to engage in case studies and develop instructional materials as well as social-emotional sensory and behavioral tools that can be implemented in the classroom. Instructional Coach and Universal Literacy Coach will provide support to teaching staff in the development of instructional materials for guided reading, centers, and small group instruction. MATH Staff Developer will engage teachers in professional development that targets math centers. This encompasses the development of math activities, including math games, guided math and other center activities. The development of this instructional materials will be based on Dibels Math data and iReady Math Diagnostic data as well. Ongoing professional development provided during Monday extended time to develop literacy centers and guided reading lesson plans. Comprehensive Action Research Plan (CARP) team will engage in in multiple inquiry cycles throughout the year with a focus on the development of number sense concepts through the implementation of centers, including math games and guided math. Professional Development Days mandated by Chancellor’s Regulations will be used to plan lessons and rigorous activities, including the development of differentiated instructional materials. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Teachers Teachers Teachers Teachers Teachers Teachers November 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Support Staff (Instructional Coach) Administration, Teachers, Support Staff (Horizon Coach) September 2018 to June 2019 October 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Support Staff (Instructional Coach and U-Lit Coach) Administration, Teachers, Support Staff (Staff Developer, and Instructional Coach) October 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 November 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Support Staff (Instructional Coach and U-Lit Coach) Administration, CARP team, Teachers, Support Staff (Staff Developer) Administration, Teachers, Support Staff (Instructional Coach and U-Lit Coach) 7  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S.133 will implement monthly PACT time. PACT time stand for Parent and Child Together, which will provide teachers, families and students with the opportunity to engage in curriculum specific activities. P.S. 133 Family Math Game Night. During this time parents will learn about the activities and math games their children engage in the classroom. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources: Fundamentals Math Centers, Making Number Talks Matter, Guided Reading book sets. Instructional Resources: Staff Developer, Instructional Coach, necessary supplies for the development of the instructional resources. Schedule adjustments: Preparation periods, Monday extended time, common planning time, after school and Saturday training rate time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January (mid-year assessment), student data will show evidence of growth in the areas of reading (20%) and (25%) math. By December 2018, 100% of teachers will have developed instructional materials that can be used in the classroom during learning centers, including guided reading and math games and/or activities By December 2018, 100% of teachers will have received observation, feedback and actionable next steps as evidence by the ADVANCE system. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. iReady and Dibels Assessment Data Advance data, specifically in components 1e and 3c. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the feedback from the 2017-2018 School Learning Environment Survey, the school must continue to work on providing opportunities for parents to volunteer time to support their school. We have identified the following areas of focus:  77% of families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school.  89% of families say that they are likely to attend a general school meeting or school event.  91% of families say that they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance  91% of families say that they have seen their child's projects, artwork, homework, tests, or quizzes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase from 77% to 87% as measured by the NYC School Learning Environment Survey as it relates to families that say that they had the opportunity to volunteer time to support the school. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Tuesday will be designated for parent workshops that will focus on academics. PS 133 will collaborate with non profit agencies like Sinergia and NYU to provide parent training on various topics Training will be provided once a month in math and E.L.A by school teachers so parents can learn new strategies being implemented in the classrooms. Parent Coordinator, Parents/ Guardians, Staff September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teacher Leaders, Support Staff We will continue to Increase communication with parents through newsletters, calendars and progress reports. Class Dojo and PS 133 School app will be implemented to keep both parents and teachers united to enhance students success in the class. We will collaborate with the Parent Coordinator and Teachers to provide workshops for parents based on the needs of our community and topics such as Restorative Practices and Leader in Me. Family Math Game Nights to promote parent engagement and to teach parents the games and activities teacher utilize in the classroom to reinforce concepts and other mathematical strategies. We will continue to strengthen student-teacher relationships by providing individual parent/teacher conferences to inform on their child's educational progress and updates. This year, teachers and other school staff are using the Parent-School Interaction Log to keep records of all interactions between home and school including positive reinforcement, attendance, social-emotional growth, and informative calls. PC, Parents/ Guardians, Staff September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teacher Leaders, Support Staff PC, Parents/ Guardians, Staff September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teacher Leaders, Support Staff PC, Parents/ Guardians, Staff September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teacher Leaders, Support Staff PC, Parents/ Guardians, Staff September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teacher Leaders, Support Staff Increase leadership opportunities to parents by including them in decision-making by attending PA meetings and implemented Parent Classroom Leaders. PC, Parents/ Guardians, Staff September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teacher Leaders, Support Staff We will continue to engage parents in Publishing celebrations and assemblies. Parents will be invited to their child’s classroom when a unit of study has been completed. PC, Parents/ Guardians, Staff September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Teacher Leaders, Support Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 0  Sinergia Parent Workshops NYU ASD Workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The parent coordinator, administrators and teachers will ensure that after-school time is dedicated to provide the workshops and activities for families. Resources to be utilized are School App, Tuesday Parent Involvement time, Parent-School Interaction log, and frequent workshops by our partners. We will also utilize resources to server as incentives such as books, tool kits of ideas and other school related materials. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 25% increase in the attendance of parents/guardians during visits, meetings and workshops. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure will be the percent of parents attending parent meetings and workshops as measured by our attendance sheets. Additionally, the School App will be used as a tool to communicate our goals with parents. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the day, students will be provided with RTI intervention services provided by classroom teacher(s), paraprofessionals, SETSS teacher and the Speech and Language providers at varied times depending on the individualized student action plan. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who include a Level 1 or Level 2 in theELAExam. The RTI process begins with high-quality instruction of all children in the general education classroom. Students will be assessed during benchmark periods (Beginning of year, middle of year and end of year). The teachers and stakeholders will use the formative and summative data to identify tiered instruction (next steps). Students who score Level 1 or 2 in their classroomUnitor chapter assessments. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) RTI Tiered Intervention The method of delivery is as follows: Tier 1: Reading Workshop model focusing on literary elements, text-based vocabulary and words in context while incorporating a multi-sensory approach that would address all types of learners Tier 2 & Tier 3: School wide implementation of Really Great Reading which is a program that focuses on addressing Phonics/Phonemic Awareness deficiencies. For Fluency and accuracy the school will utilize Great Leaps, and Reader’s Theatre to address fluency deficiencies. In order to address Comprehension deficiencies, the school will use the F Tier 1 – guided reading group instruction, 1:1 student conferences, providing explicit next steps for students based on data (Formative and Summative Data) and peer/peer conferences Tier 2 – guided reading group instruction, and 1:1 student conferences, providing explicit next steps for students based on data (Formative and Summative Data) Tier 3: (6-8 week cycle Action Plan) Push in/Pull out RTI Action Plan to for students who have not demonstrated progress. The RTI plan will be based on formative and summative assessments. The action plan will be 2  Mathematics During the day, students will be provided with RTI intervention services provided by classroom teacher(s), paraprofessionals, SETSS teacher and the Speech and Language providers at varied times depending on the individualized student action plan The RTI process begins with high-quality instruction of all children in the general education classroom. Students will be assessed during benchmark periods (Beginning of year, middle of year and end of year). The teachers and stakeholders will use the formative and summative data to identify tiered instruction (next steps). & P Reading Intervention Program that is tailored and explicit. explicit and strategic to target specific skills For Vocabulary , the school will utilize the Wordly Wise Program which provides students with strategic strategies around vocabulary building. RTI Tiered Instruction: Tier 1: Workshop model, small group instruction (Using Go Math Core curriculum), 1:1 conferences where the teacher provides explicit next steps, and peer/peer conferences. Tier 2: small group instruction, RTI Go Math tool kit, 1:1 conferences where the teacher provides strategic next steps and differentiated Go Math tasks/activities from the Reteach and Enrich portion of the Go Math Curriculum. Tier 3: Small guided math group with explicit, structured instruction, 1:1 student conferences where the teacher provides strategic next steps for the students, Go Math RTI tool kit, RTI Team provides students The method of delivery is as follows: Tier 1 – Workshop model, small group instruction, 1:1 student conferences, providing explicit next steps for students based on data (Formative and Summative Data) and peer/peer conferences Tier 2 – small group instruction, and 1:1 student conferences, providing explicit next steps for students based on data (Formative and Summative Data) Tier 3: (6-8 week cycle Action Plan) Push in/Pull out RTI Action Plan to for students whom have not demonstrated progress. The RTI plan will be based on formative and summative assessments. The action plan will be explicit and strategic 3  Science During the day, students will be provided with RTI intervention services provided by classroom teacher(s), paraprofessionals, SETSS teacher and the Speech and Language providers at varied times depending on the individualized student action plan The RTI process begins with high-quality instruction of all children in the general education classroom using the Foss Science Kit and focusing on the Scope and Sequence for each grade level (K – 5). Progress of students who continue to score below the grade performance levels on both summative and formative assessments will be monitored and recommended for additional tiered support . to target specific skills. The method of delivery is as follows: Tier 1 – Workshop model, small group instruction, 1:1 student conferences, providing explicit next steps for students based on data (Formative and Summative Data) and peer/peer conferences Tier 2 – small group instruction, and 1:1 student conferences, providing explicit next steps for students based on data (Formative and Summative Data) Tier 3: (6-8 week cycle Action Plan) Push in/Pull out RTI Action Plan to for students whom have not demonstrated progress. The RTI plan will be based on formative and summative assessments. The action plan will be explicit and strategic to target specific skills. with specific goals that derive from student data. This data is collected from formative and summative assessments. RTI Tiered Instruction: Tier 1: School wide implementation of the workshop model, small group instruction (Using Foss Science Kits and aligning it to the Scope and Sequence), 1:1 conferences where the teacher provides explicit next steps, and peer/peer conferences. Tier 2: small group instruction, 1:1 conferences where the teacher provides strategic next steps and differentiated tasks/activities from the Foss Science Kit. Tier 3: Small guided group with explicit, structured instruction, 1:1 student conferences where the teacher provides strategic next steps for the students, Foss Science Kit differentiated tasks and RTI Team provides students with specific goals that need to be addressed which is 4  Social Studies The RTI process begins with high-quality instruction of all children in the general education classroom using the Social Studies while aligning it to the Scope and Sequence for each grade level (K – 5). Progress of students who continue to score below the grade performance levels on both summative and formative assessments will be monitored and recommended for additional tiered support During the day, students will be provided with RTI intervention services provided by classroom teacher(s), paraprofessionals, SETSS teacher and the Speech and Language providers at varied times depending on the individualized student action plan The method of delivery is as follows: Tier 1 – Workshop model, small group instruction, 1:1 student conferences, providing explicit next steps for students based on data (Formative and Summative Data) and peer/peer conferences Tier 2 – small group instruction, and 1:1 student conferences, providing explicit next steps for students based on data (Formative and Summative Data) Tier 3: (6-8 week cycle Action Plan) Push in/Pull out RTI Action Plan to for students whom have not demonstrated progress. The RTI plan will be based on formative and summative assessments. The action plan will be explicit and strategic to target specific skills. collected from the formative and summative data. RTI Tiered Instruction: Tier 1: Workshop model, small group instruction (Using Trade Books and aligning it to the Social Studies Scope and Sequence), 1:1 conferences where the teacher provides explicit next steps, and peer/peer conferences. Tier 2: small group instruction, 1:1 conferences where the teacher provides strategic next steps and differentiated tasks/activities derived from the Social Studies Scope and Sequence Tier 3: Small guided group with explicit, structured instruction, 1:1 student conferences where the teacher provides strategic next steps for the students, Trade Books aligned with the Social Studies Scope and Sequence, differentiated tasks derived from the Scope and Sequence and the Trade Books, and RTI Team provides students with specific goals that need to be 5 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) P.S. 133 utilizes the Leader In Me approach which was designed by Steven Covey, to create habits that will ensure that children are successful leaders. The school will also incorporate PBIS and the Ruler approach. These initiatives are designed to address all our learners (visual, auditory, multi-sensory approach etc. During the day, students will be provided with RTI intervention services provided by classroom teacher(s), paraprofessionals, and school guidance counselor at varied times depending on the individualized student action plan addressed which is collected from the formative and summative data. RTI Tiered Instruction: Tier 1: Leader In Me school wide initiative, using the 7 habits model, students’ tracking their academic and personal goals while also incorporating PBIS Tier 2 & 3: Leader In Me school wide initiative, student tracking of personal and academic goals (differentiated formats) , implementation of PBIS, The Ruler Approach which address students’ social/emotional challenges and supports our students with self-regulating coping strategies, “At-Risk” group/individual counseling sessions with our school counselor. The method of delivery is as follows: Tier 1: Leader In Me- is embedded into our school wide schedule. Leader In Me is scheduled to occur 1 per week whole class instruction. PBIS will be implemented school wide and used on a daily basis. Tier 2 & 3: Leader In Me- is embedded into our school wide schedule. Leader In Me is scheduled to occur 1 per week whole class instruction. PBIS will be implemented school wide and used on a daily basis. The Ruler Approach will be implemented on a daily basis for students who have been identified as “at risk” and needing an individualized student action plan. 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 10 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students are provided with at risk counseling, resources and support by the Housing Family Worker. Students are also provided with uniforms, book bags, school supplies and other school related materials to support their learning. Additionally, students are provided with after-school sports activities and programs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The strategies used by PS 133 to recruit, retain and support teachers and ensure highly qualified teachers are the following: PS 133 utilizes the Open Market System and New Teacher Finder to find highly qualified teachers, especially for our special education population. We also work closely with the ASD of Horizon Program to recruit Special Education Teachers that have experience and training with children on the Autism Spectrum. In anticipation of possible hires we give out our preference sheet in May. We then reach out to local Universities that our school has a good working relationship with to recruit possible highly qualified candidates. The school has a partnership with Hunter College by providing P.S.133 with teacher interns and possible candidates for hire. We provide ongoing professional development for our teachers in house and provide various opportunities for teachers to participate in out-side professional development offered by various organizations. We have support from District 05 and Manhattan Borough Center, as our teachers are provided with workshops around specific areas. We utilize PD to address the school- wide trends we noticed throughout our observations. For example, “Developing” ratings in 3c and 3d as an area of need. We utilize the strategy the “Slice Protocol” to conduct Learning Walks to support teacher input and feedback. We have hired a Model Teacher to support all our teachers with the implementation of best practices. Teacher teams meet for common planning meetings and visit classes regularly to support teachers with strategies discussed in the meetings. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The entire staff meets regularly to align curriculum and assessments to the CCLS. Principal, assistant principals, teachers and paraprofessionals meet weekly to map curriculum and norm expectations. In addition to common planning meetings, teacher teams and administrators meet to engage in inquiry, action research work and task 9  analysis. The Horizon Teachers and Paraprofessionals attend weekly meetings focused on parent involvement ideas and case studies to support classroom management and social/emotional strategies specific to the Horizon program. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Parents of our Pre-K students are invited to a beginning of the year orientation session where goals of the program are discussed. Our Pre-K teacher shares home to school strategies with the parents. She has explained the preparation necessary for students to transition into a CCLS aligned Kindergarten and has disseminated information of the Common Core in Pre-K using materials from our new Pre-K curriculum, "Happily Ever After." Additionally, the Kindergarten teacher also supports by providing Open House and curriculum night for Pre-K parents. Students are provided with opportunities to visit Kindergarten classrooms and experience the flow of the day for K students. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. PS 133 has a MOSL committee. The MOSL committee is responsible for assessment selections that will be used for ADVANCE. When the decision by the committee is finalized, they informed the rest of the staff of the school’s selection. The MOSL team utilized the data from the MOSL writing traits rubric to inform our professional development and classroom instruction and further assessments and interventions needed. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 0  plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 140,144.00 21,880.00 0 0 1,370,926.00 X X NA NA X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5a Section 5a Section 5a, Section 5b, 5c, 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 1  and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S.133 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S.133 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 3  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSAr/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 4  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S.133, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 5  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 6  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 7  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 8  ● always try my best to learn. 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 05 School Name Fred R. Moore Academy Borough Manhattan School Number 133 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Patricia E. Balbuena Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Agnes C. Zodiatis Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Joan Mitchell Coach type here School Counselor Felix Delacruz Parent N/A Parent Coordinator David Alleyne Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 179 0 Total number of ELLs 16 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.94%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? CS 133 uses Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark to assess the learly literacy skills of ELLs and general education students. Insights: Last year CS133 did not meet a AYP or AMAO. The result was a shift from an all pull-out model to one that is a combination of push-in and pull-out. By doing this students will lose less instructional time with their classroom teacher and therefore be exposed to more content area material. The information helps to inform our instructional plan by helping us to target those students who need additional assistance in order for them for them to meet their target in the upper grades. Data: CS 133 has a small ELL population. An analysis of the NYSESLAT indicates that only two students moved a level. Two students remained at the same level and made a gain of 43 points. Two students went down a level. The rest remained at the same level making less than a gain of 43 points. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 1  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? After reviewing last years’ AYP and AMAO report C.S.133 has shift its focus from solely a pullout program to one that is a combination of stand-alone and integrated. Ms. Zodiatis will work in collaboration with classroom teachers in order to ensure that ELL students do not miss core subjects and that their vocabulary is supported through the use of pictures and realia and any addition scaffold they might need. Ms. Zodiatis meets with classroom teachers to discuss other data such as classroom assessments, the MOSL, and teacher observations. Based on the data and observations instruction is modified to address students' areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] In addition to looking at past exams, C.S. 133 administers baseline assessments then performs an item analysis. Teachers then discuss the results at weekly Inquiry meetings where they determine students’ area of strength and what areas need support. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSITELL scores are often quite low but after a year’s service most students develop good listening and speaking skills or what is termed BICS skills. The NYSESLAT data shows ELLs who are in the beginning level are mostly newcomers. It also shows that students need to develop CALP since reading and writing are usually the areas that keep ELLs from testing out of ESL. After review the NYSESLAT data, the patterns revealed were: • Speaking is in line with general abilities for the majority of the intermediated and advanced students. It is the Reading and Writing skills that our holding our intermediate and advanced 4th and 5th grade students back from the proficiency level. This is especially the case in the ELLs who are on the advanced level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. ELL students are grouped hetrogenously by grade whenever possible. There are self-contained bridge classes. If an ELL student is in one of these clases, Ms. Zodiatis will make every effort to push-in for integrated ENL that is teaching the same content area subject. If schedualing makes this difficult, the student with the IEP will follow Ms. Zodiatis to a grade appropriate class for ingrated services. In the case of intergrated ENL, if an entire grade cannot be group hetrogenously, students will be grouped based on consecutive grades. For instances, second and third grade, third 2  and fourth grade, and/or fourth and fifth might be seen together. For our standalone model, students we grouped together based on grade. For instances 2 nd and 3 rd , 3 rd and 4 th , or 4 th and 5 th . In a few instances students were grouped together based on NYSESLAT levels. In these instances Ms. Zodiatis meets with classroom teachers to ensure that work is properly differentated. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering students receive 180 minutes of intergrated instruction in ELA. They also receive 180 minutes of instruction in standalone ENL. Emerging students receive 180 minutes of ELA ingergrated instruction in ELA, and 90 minutes if instruction in standalone ENL. The other 90 minutes of their instruction is done via intergrated instruction. Transitioning students receive 90 minutes of instruction in intergrated ELA and another 90 minutes of instruction in another content area. Expanding students receive 180 minutes of instruction in intergrated ELA or another core content area. Commanding students receive 90 minutes of ingergrated instruction in ELA or another core content area. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher collaborates with the classroom teacher. Then refers to the Engage NY site to see how each standard aligns to the language progressions. These progressions provide rigorous and academically appropriate activties. In our Freestanding ENL program English is the target language of instruction Bilingual dictionaries are available in class as well as Math Glossories in Spanish and Arabic. In addition, graphic organizers are also used. The ENL program uses a variety of grammar infused reading and writing texts aligned to the common core standards. The ELL instructional model reflects the Balanced literacy program with an emphasis on the steps in the writing process. ELLs need more grammar support and editing conferences than mainstream students and this is facilitated through small class instruction. As in Balanced literacy, reading and writing are two sides of the same coin. Our students achieve listening and speaking skills more quickly then reading and writing skills. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? New students are given the Spanish Lab if they do not score commanding/proficent on the NYSITELL.. If a student speaks Spanish, he/she can be evulated using informal methods such as read alouds, and discussions. In addition, if a version of an exam exists in a student's home language, it will be offfered to the student. If a version of an exam does not exist in a student's home languague, a translator will be obtained. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiation of instruction for ELL subgroups. a. Plan for SIFE The SIFE population is zero. Our contingency plan calls for: 3  • Making an individualized student needs assessment • Creation of an AIS plan for the student focus on the literacy and math component • Grade appropriate instructional support materials • Differentiation of instruction in all areas • Use of technology such as computer programs such as English in a Flash, Starfall, and various other programs to support acquisition of English and Math skills. b. Plan for Newcomers When a new student is registered in our school, we provide the following resources to facilitate the transition. • An informal student orientation • Buddy system identifying a similar student in his/her class that will assist during the day • Encourage student to participate in the after School activities provided by the Harlem Children’s zone. • An informal assessment is provided to identify possible Academic Intervention programs. • Home school communication. • Introduce the parents and students to the Social Workers at the Children of the World Community Program. c. Plan for receiving service for 4 to 6 years ELLs . An analysis of these students’ scores on the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math assessments suggests that their problem is one of reading and writing. Our action plan for this group involves. • An after school program, targeting reading and writing during the week. • Monitoring the progress of students in all content areas to differentiate instruction for literacy needs. • A daily writing sample is collected from long term ELLs. d. Long Term ELLs: Our contingency plan calls for: • Making an individualized student needs assessment • Creation of an AIS plan for the student focus on the literacy and math component • Grade appropriate instructional support materials • Differentiation of instruction in all areas • Use of technology such as computer programs such as English in a Flash, Starfall, and various other programs to support acquisition of English and Math skills. e. Former ELLs 90 minutes of ingergrated instruction in ELA or another content area. Making an individualized student needs assessment. Creation of an AIS plan for the student to focus on the literacy and math component Grade appropriate instructional support materials. Differentiation of instruction in all areas. Use of technology such as computer programs such as English in a Flash, Starfall, AR reading, and other various programs to support the acquisition of English and math skills. ELL students who have tested proficent receive extra time during state exams 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Some of the ways the school is using curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs are: • Continue to strongly target language development across the grades and content areas, creating opportunities for active meaningful engagement. • Additional support in listening skills , including increased use technological activities in the classroom. • Academic Intervention Services for SIFE students and those performing below grade level during the school day as well as extended hours. 4  • After School classes offered to target specific modalities and to help students on all levels familiarize students with the language skills necessary to pass the ELA and the NYSESLAT. All activities and additional support offered to our ELL population is focused on their acquisition of language proficiency and academic progress. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ENL program uses a variety of grammar infused reading and writing texts aligned to NY State performance standards and the ( (number 9 continued) Common Core. The Ell teacher has access to both the Ready Gen and Go Math websites so she could plan collabratively with classroom teachers. The ELL instructional model reflects the Balanced literacy program with an emphasis on the steps in the writing process. ELLs need more grammar support and editing conferences than mainstream students and this is facilitated through small class instruction that draws on our ELL teacher’s background as a professional editor for the Adele Leone Writer’s Agency and twenty years of teaching remedial and ESL writing to both adults and children. As in Balanced literacy, reading and writing are two sides of the same coin. Our students achieve listening and speaking skills more quickly then reading and writing skills. Since our instruction is data driven, C.S. 133 is emphasizing developing reading and writing skills. To this end, a writing sample based on responding to literature or factual research is collected on a daily basis. To target the writing skills needed on the NYSESLAT, C.S. 133 uses Empire State NYSESLAT. Best Practices in Reading grade based readers from Option publishers pair fiction with non-fiction to build reading comprehension strategies. In tandem with our reading program such writing workbooks as Writing Performance Counts and Hit the Ground Running: Exploring Idioms in English from Options publishing as well as the Language Handbook series from Steck Vaughn Publishers provide structure for our students to achieve writing proficiency. Our students are encouraged to search the internet to learn to do research for their writing. Beginning students use the Starfall internet site that lets students develop phonics based reading and writing skills. Starfall is self correcting and lets students hear any word they don’t understand with the push of a button. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The ENL teacher, Ms. Zodiatis, has access to both the Ready Gen, Reading A-Z, and Go Math websites. This allows her to effectively colloborate with classroom teachers. Reading A-Z and Starfall are used as intervention programs for ELL with 0-3 years of servic, and ELL with disablities students in ELA. Sight word flash cards, WIlson are also used as interventions for this subgroup. The Freestanding ESL program uses a variety of grammar infused reading and writing texts aligned to NY State performance standards and the Common Core. Our students achieve listening and speaking skills more quickly then reading and writing skills. Since our instruction is data driven, C.S. 133 is emphasizing developing reading and writing skills. To this end, a writing sample based on responding to literature or factual research is collected on a daily basis. To target the writing skills needed on the NYSESLAT, C.S. 133 uses Empire State's NYSESLAT test prep. Best Practices in Reading grade based readers from Option publishers pair fiction with non-fiction to build reading comprehension strategies. In tandem with our reading program such writing workbooks as Writing Performance Counts and Hit the Ground Running: Exploring Idioms in English from Options publishing as well as the Language Handbook series from Steck Vaughn Publishers provide structure for our students to achieve writing proficiency. Our students are encouraged to search the internet to learn to do research for their writing. Beginning students use the Starfall internet site that lets students develop phonics based reading and writing skills. Starfall is self correcting and lets students hear any word they don’t understand with the push of a button. Other internet sites such as Enchanted Learning, PBS Kids, Brain Pop and Internet4classrooms, that aid literacy and math skills are successfully employed. The ELL stratagies in Go Math are used as interventions for ELL, ELLs with diablities, in math. For social studies and science graphic organizers and word banks are created to help support students. The end of unit assessments in both math and ELA are used to drive instruction. Since the ENL is not bilingual, no intervention in the native language is offered. If a bilingual Spanish pedague is availiable he/she will translate for a student. If the need arises, Translation Services will be contacted to help support a student. 5  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The use of the language progressions on the Engage site to help differentiate instruction. The use of Teacher's College for writing. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? AR and English in a Flash were discontinued because they did not provide students with enough cmmon core aligned rigor. No other programs have been discontiuned. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Every effort is made to actively encourage the participation by our ELLs in all school programs. In particular our sports teams and athletics give our ELLs the opportunity to develop their basic interpersonal communication skills and sense of community. All our ELLs have equal access to our afterschool and Saturday academic support programs. A strong guidance system is provided by our Bilingual Guidance Counselor, Mr. Felix De La Cruz. He provides both guidance and family support activities to our ELLs in Spanish and English. Our social worker also provides guidance and family support services to our ELLs.. This enables us to be certain that parents and children are fully informed about our programs and supplemental services. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL program uses a variety of grammar infused reading and writing texts aligned to common core standards. Reading and writing are two sides of the same coin. Our students achieve listening and speaking skills more quickly then reading and writing skills. Since our instruction is data driven, C.S. 133 is emphasizing developing reading and writing skills. Best Practices in Reading grade based readers from Option publishers pair fiction with non-fiction to build reading comprehension strategies. In tandem with our reading program such writing workbooks as Writing Performance Counts and Hit the Ground Running: Exploring Idioms in English from Options publishing as well as the Language Handbook series from Steck Vaughn Publishers provide structure for our students to achieve writing proficiency. Our students are encouraged to search the internet to learn to do research for their writing. Beginning students use the Starfall internet site that lets students develop phonics based reading and writing skills. Starfall is self correcting and lets students hear any word they don’t understand with the push of a button. Other internet sites such as Enchanted Learning, PBS Kids, Brain Pop and Internet4classrooms, that aid literacy and math skills are successfully employed. In addition, other reading material such as classic titles that are available in different levels, newpaper articles are also used. Along with graphic organizers, and sentence frames are used to help students develop advanced comprehension skills such as paraphrasing, comparing and constrasting multiple texts among other skills. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? C.S.133 offers dual language dictionaries. Dual language dictionaries for math and science are printed from the NYC DOE site. Students at the entering and emerging levels are allowed to use their native language where applicalbe. We will continue to provide Freestanding ENL. No programs in current use will be discontinued. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our required service support and resources reflect ELL age and grade levels as evidenced by our division of Freestanding ELL services based on grade level and proficiency level. If a student is a newcommer or struggling reader he or she will be placed in a pull-out group that focuses on the use of more phonics based instruction. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The ENL program uses a variety of grammar infused reading and writing texts aligned to common core standards. Reading and writing are two sides of the same coin. Our students achieve listening and speaking skills more quickly then reading and writing skills. Since our instruction is data driven, C.S. 133 is emphasizing developing reading and writing skills. Best Practices in Reading grade based readers from Option publishers pair fiction with non-fiction to build reading comprehension strategies. In tandem with our reading program such writing workbooks as Writing Performance Counts and Hit the Ground 6  Running: Exploring Idioms in English from Options publishing as well as the Language Handbook series from Steck Vaughn Publishers provide structure for our students to achieve writing proficiency. Our students are encouraged to search the internet to learn to do research for their writing. Beginning students use the Starfall internet site that lets students develop phonics based reading and writing skills. Starfall is self correcting and lets students hear any word they don’t understand with the push of a button. Other internet sites such as Enchanted Learning, PBS Kids, Brain Pop and Internet4classrooms, that aid literacy and math skills are successfully employed. In addition, other reading material such as classic titles that are available in different levels, newpaper articles are also used. Along with graphic organizers, and sentence frames are used to help students develop advanced comprehension skills such as paraphrasing, comparing and constrasting multiple texts among other skills. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). C.S. 133 has incorperated "The Leader In Me." All staff was encouraged to attend a workshop that began before the beginng of the school year. The principles taught were incorperated on the first day of school and reinforced every day during moring assembly. Newcomer students are also encouraged to attend the after school programs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers at C.S. 133 are involved in instructing ELLs. All staff at C.S.133 are given the opportunity every year to fulfill the hours of professional development that teachers of ELLs are required to have in their career to meet NYCDOE requirements. Our ELL teacher attends professional development. These professional developments provide our ESL teacher with the latest research on learning techniques and both current and new regulations and mandates concerning ESL. The professional development on Mondays provides teachers with PDS on how to support ELLs, as well as other students 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our Bilingual Guidance Counselor, Mr. Felix De La Cruz provide assistance to our ELLs in choosing Middle Schools based on academic needs and goals. Every ELL student is provided with a list of available Middle schools and is informed of the programs they offer. Mr. De la Cruprovide a parent workshop for ELLs and their parents to enlighten, inform and facilitate their choice of Middle school. The professional development Mondays, teachers are also sent to PDs outsie of the building throughout the year. 7  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The English Language Learner’s (ELL’s) parent involvement at C.S. 133-Fred R. Moore Academy is an extension of our Parent Compact piece for parent involvement of the Comprehensive Education Plan (CEP) for the school. All parents are encouraged to be involved at the school. We pull from many segments of the school community to outreach and support parents and our ELL’s families, including the School Based Support Team, the School Based Clinic, the Guidance Counselor, and the ESL teacher, the Parent Association (PA), the School Leadership Team (SLT), the Principal/ Vice Principal and the Parent Coordinator. Our goal is to support and service all the famillies that make up our wonderful school community. In addition, the ELL teacher, Ms. Zodiatis will also schedule the annual meeting to discuss the progress of ELL students Jan./Feb. Arrangements for a qualified translator will be made. This meeting is in addition to intial parent orientation, and the parent teacher conferences. Attendance will be recorded using existing procedures. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. During the school registration process Mr. Alleyne gives to all new parents whose children are being enrolled his contact information. All parents are made to feel welcomed and to become part of the school community. He makes his business card available again during the school’s annual Meet & Greet night. It is also here that we find out find out what some of the needs our parents are. Additionally, a parent survey, goes out at the beginning of the school year from the Parent Coordinator along with the Parent Association in order to further hone in on the needs of the parents, including ELL’s parents and based upon their response to the survey we bring in programs, conduct workshops, provide classes and hold meeting to address those needs. A school calendar is sent home monthly with the children giving an overview of all the activities and events that are avalilible for parents to participate in during that month. Their questions and concerns are taken very seriously during meeting and are brought up at SLT meeting. Also when children at the school are identified needing english Mr. Alleyne calls those parents to come in for a video presentation of the three programs being offered by the DOE regarding its language arts program; Free ESL, Dual Language and Transitional Bilingual. Attendance is taken and the video is shone. Ms. Zodiatis the ESL teacher gives the parent the paper work to fill out and after going over the options with them they make their choice of what program they would like their child to participate in. There is a monthly parents focus group that is well attended and all parents are welcome to attended. Another outlet that parents have to address issues of concerns is during the monthly Coffee with the Principal Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Patricia Balbuena, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Fred R. Moore Academy- CS 133M School DBN: 05M133 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Patricia E. Balbuena Title Principal Joan Mitchell Assistant Principal David Alleyne Parent Coordinator Agnes C. Zodiatis ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Jasmira Caceres Other Assistant Principal Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 0  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 05M133 School Name: Fred R. Moore Academy Superintendent: D. Rux The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No David Saun Adriana Alleyne Forte Paredes Parent Coordinator ENL Teachers Spanish Teacher YES NO NO YES YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of parents comes from the intake process during registration. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 1  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Parental preferences about language communication is delivered both orally and written. The languages of our parents are English, French, Arabic, and Spanish. The languages of our parents are English, French, Arabic, and Spanish. 10% The languages of our parents are English, French, Arabic, and Spanish. 90% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Bengali Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School Calendar Teacher Letters Monthly Monthly Parent Teacher Conference Flyer Four times a year School Handbook Once a year Office of Translation (via phone or email attachments) Office of Translation (via phone or email attachments) Office of Translation (via phone or email attachments) Office of Translation (via phone or email attachments) 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-teacher conferences Four times a year open school night, Monthly interpretation service(s)? Translated flyers and brochures Translated flyers and brochures 2  parent orientation for parents of new ELLs Beginning of the year, and whenever a new ELL is identified Tuesday parent engagement Parent Workshops Weekly Monthly Translated flyers and brochures Translated flyers and brochures Translated flyers and brochures 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have already translated standard emergency statements in the event of evacuation, relocation, and other emergency situations. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. School staff received a digital copy of Chancelor's Regulation A-663 Staff were made aware of the number they need to call if translation services are required Staff were made available of the email address they can use to send documents for translation purposes Interpreters are hired if required. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) These documents will be posted . The Parents' Guide to Language Access is located on the counter in the main office so that parents can point and identify their language of choice. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will use parent surveys, workshops and interviews with their own children. The purpose is to obtainfrom the children how we are doing to help them with the communication between home and school. We will offer and reach out to the parents to come to the Principal's Coffee meet and greet monthly to have them become part of the school community and culture. 3  4 
