 01M134 School Name: P.S. 134 HENRIETTA SZOLD Principal: ROBERT PERALES   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 134 – Henrietta Szold School 310100010134 PreK-5 School Number (DBN): 01M134 293 East Broadway, New York, NY 10002 (212)673-4470 Phone Number: (212)475-6142 Fax: Robert Perales rperales2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Robert Perales EttySavitzky Eileen Delvalle TBA Deidre Ruiz NA NA District Information Community District 1 Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: Carry Chan Superintendent: PS 20 – 166 Essex Street, New York, NY 10002 cchan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 353-2948 Phone Number: (212) 353-2945 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Ave, 8 th Floor, New York, NY 10001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (646) 470-0721 Phone Number: (917) 339-1765 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Robert Perales EttySavitzky Eileen Delvalle Josephine Chan MemfisLora Beatrice Lopez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher   Naomi Sandel Colleen Blaire Tiana Rivas Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The vision of PS 134 is that all members of the school community will support our students in becoming responsible, productive citizens who will succeed in achieving their highest potential. We believe that all children can learn, and develop the skills and mindsets to become lifelong learners and excellent communicators.   At PS 134 we believe teaching to the heart and spirit as well as the intellect of our entire community. We strive to provide exciting and challenging opportunities through daily experiences that enhance both social-emotional growth and academic success to support our students as a whole. We uphold the expectation that our students will meet the high standards we set for them, and celebrate student achievement for successful mastery. Our students are encouraged to be active participants in their own learning process on their way to becoming excellent writers, readers, mathematicians, scientists and artists. Essential to our mission is the awareness, appreciation, and respect for the diverse cultures of the members of our school community. By creating a safe learning environment for all children, we strive to support students developing skills for their growth within our school community and beyond. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 134 encourages the whole community to be an important part of the decision making process and form an active partnership for educational success of our children. The school continues to support a broad curriculum with learning experiences that promote academic, social and emotional well-being of students. To this end, every student participates in dance, developing confidence and poise and expressing their ideas and knowledge through physical movement, incorporating science and social studies through their self-designed choreography. The art studio, in partnership with Studio in a School, supports students’ self-expression. This program echoes and enriches classroom instruction as well as developing life skills such as focus, hard work and turning mistakes into learning experiences. After-school activities, through partnerships with Henry Street Settlement and University Settlement, also provide extensions and enrichment. With the full implementation of the Common Core Learning Standards, students, parents, and teachers note higher student engagement through richer content in lessons, texts, and class activities. For example, students debate attributes of Greek deities, craft "help wanted" ads for colonial trades, and discuss human rights issues impacting the lives of migrant workers in California. In addition to increased student engagement and rigor of academic tasks, teachers plan scaffolds for different learners based on close review of student work. The scaffolds include graphic organizers, visual charts, flash cards, and varied exemplars. As a result, all students have access to enriched curricula and instruction. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The Henrietta Szold School is an elementary school with 305 students from Prekindergarten through 5 th grade. The school population is comprised of 21.61% Black, 60.66% Hispanic, 10.16% Asian and 3.61% white students. Boys account for 54.43% of the students enrolled and girls account for 45.47%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017 - 2018 was 90.1%.41.31% of the students have Individualized Education Plans and 9.51% of the students are English Language Learners. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In the 2017-2018 school year, PS 134 as a community focused on literacy instruction, under the Section 5A for Rigorous Instruction. We have made strides in elevating the reading instruction as measured by student performance in the Fountas and Pinnell reading levels in the 2016-2017 school year. However, upon deeper inspection, our school has realized a critical need to examine and re-evaluate our literacy instruction - particularly in writing - to continue to support student growth in all academic subjects. This served as the focus for the 2018-2019 in section 5A. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 01M134 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 297 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 31 31 17 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 21 19 17 17 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 87.5% % Reduced Lunch 8.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 61.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 30.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 63% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 54 53 89.7% 1.7% 40.1% 21.5% 11.1% 2.4% 2 0% 9.6 33.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A NO N/A N/A NO N/A YES N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 31% of the students in grades 3-5 scored level 3 or above on the 2018 NYS CCLS English Language Arts tests. We know that more of our students are capable of demonstrating grade level proficiency in English Language Arts. In particular, we noticed that our students needed further support in effectively articulating their thoughts and ideas in writing. Specifically, we noted that in the 2018 June Instructional Reports, our students performed below city average in the constructed response questions in various facets of writing to sources. Also, the 2018, ELA School-Level data shows that a decreased level of proficiency has occurred over grade-bandwidths (Grade 3: 83% scored a level 2 or above/ Grade 4: 70% scored a level 2 or above/ Grade 5: 51% of students scored a level 2 or above ; with specific attention noted with our Students with Disabilities (Grade 3: 63% scored a level 2 or above/ Grade 4: 43% scored a level 2 or above/ Grade 5: 5% of students scored a level 2 or above). To address these gaps, a more rigorous and differentiated writing instruction must be implemented consistently across the grade and between grades, increasing rigor, quality and volume. We see a great need to unify and consolidate our school curriculum, and increase student exposure to and use of expressive written language. In addition, the school community determined that all staff members – classroom teachers, specialists, and paraprofessionals need continuous professional development in differentiating instruction and delivering effective writing lessons that meet all student needs. To this end, PreK-5th grade teachers will build upon the instructional planning work of the 2018-2019 school year in aligning our writing curriculum by integrating Teacher College, Writing Workshop into our school. All classroom teachers will norm student performances in benchmark assessments by using common rubrics brought into the community from Teacher College, and apply consistent student-driven and teacher assessments. Also, our Response to Intervention work will target specific literacy strands to target our interventions. Also, our Tier 1, instructional Core will begin small group and individual conferences with our students receiving additional, out-of-class support in order to increase the individual instruction. Teacher College Reading and Writing Project's Units of Study will align our Instructional Core in all grades in order to generate clear and common assessments, units and lessons. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in students scoring proficient as measured by the 2019 English Language Arts State Test and Mathematics State Test in grades 3-5. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The principal will meet monthly with teachers and facilitate greater data collection, analysis and use by the teachers in aligning their instruction to the Common Core curriculum. Data sources will include Teachers College Writing Assessments, Units of Study rubrics, spelling inventories, as well as student writing and work samples. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom teachers, specialists 9/18/18 - 6/8/19 School administration Grade teams will utilize rubrics to assess student writing based on Teachers College Writing Continuum school-wide. Teachers will target instruction based on analysis of each student's writing and create concrete ways for students to self-identify areas for their own growth. Classroom teachers, specialists 10/16/18 - 6/8/19 School administration Student achievement data will inform the formation of subgroups of particular students that require additional attention and differentiated writing instruction, either via strategy groupings, intervention, or academic enrichment. In addition, the past editions of the New York State Common Core Learning Standards (NYS CCLS) English Language Arts (ELA) test will be examined to note specific learning standards on which students did not perform well. Through this analysis, teachers will identify specific content and skill strands that require additional supplementation from outside materials and boost instructional strategies to meet those needs. The data analysis will create common points of discussion, collaboration and modified instruction between classroom teachers with Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS), Academic Intervention Services (AIS), and English as a Second Language (ESL) teachers, as well as related service providers. The SBST team will incorporate the student's Reading Inventory Checklist and Grade Level Writing Rubics to monitor student's progress. Student groupings will form the basis of effective and targeted use of parallel teaching, center teaching and flexible skills groups. Under the guidance and facilitation of the school administration, the grade teams will look at both student and teacher work to examine higher levels of questioning, student exposure to and use of written expressive language. Teachers will meet by grade levels on a weekly basis to plan lessons, refine assessments and expand upon TC's Units of Study with the Common Core Learning Standards and the Citywide Instructional Expectations School’s lowest third 9/18/18 - 6/8/19 School administration, data specialist classroom teachers, specialists Classroom teachers, specialists 9/18/18 - 6/8/19 School administration 4 Each grade will communicate with families on the instructional strategies, content and curricula work that the teachers and students are working on, as well as concrete ways that families can support their students at home through monthly classroom newsletters, individualized conferences, step-up meetings, and meet the teacher evenings. These strategies and support ideas will be echoed in the Principal's Parent Breakfast on a monthly basis. Students, families 9/18/18 - 6/8/19 School administration, classroom teachers, specialists 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school-wide instructional focus on writing will be discussed and explored fully within a variety of parent engagement activities, including curriculum night (September 2018) lead by classroom teachers, parent workshops lead by classroom, intervention and support teachers during Parent Engagement afternoons, Principals' Breakfast (first Friday of each month) by the principal and assistant principal. Throughout these meetings, parents will be engaged in understanding the instructional approach and concrete steps and actions that parents can do at home to support their students' work and growth. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Principal & assistant principal, data specialist, classroom general education teachers. ● SETSS, IEP, AIS, ESL and ICT special education teachers. ● Structured and pre-scheduled collaborative planning time within the prep schedule, for not only grade teams, but also teams across grades and areas; modifying curriculum to meet student needs, identify additional resources needed, and reallocate the services of the AIS and intervention services. ● Funds and resources for per-diem substitute teachers; curriculum materials and resources from Teachers College Reading and Writing Project; professional development opportunities through District 1 CSD, inter-school visitations and Manhattan Field Service Center. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 30% increase, from September 2018 assessments to January 2019 assessments, in grades 3-5 scoring at level 3 &4 as measured by the Teachers College Writing Pathways Assessment rubrics and benchmarks. 5  By February 2019, there will be a 30% increase from October 2018 assessments in grades K-2 as measured by DIBELS Benchmarks. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachers College Reading and Writing - Writing Pathways Assessments rubrics; school-wide student tracking template on shared school-wide Google Drive. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The 2018 Learning Environment Survey indicated that 72% of teachers responded positively about the Schools' Supportive Environment, which was lower than the city and district average. In particular, teacher responses across multiple questions indicated a need for greater support for teachers to help them "recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities." To address this need, the school initiated several efforts to support teachers and the school community at large to support students' social emotional needs that hamper student academic achievement. Paraprofessionals were supported with additional professional development to help de-escalate crisis situations; teachers embarked on professional development on Responsive Classrooms and the Mosaic Project to implement in their classrooms; additional counseling and mental health resources, including an additional guidance counselor on staff, a full-time social worker, as well as support from the School-Based Mental Health Clinic through Henry Street Settlement. However, it is clear that more work needs to be done, and a systemic school-wide effort is needed towards supporting teacher growth in addressing the social-emotional needs of our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the will be a 10% decrease of Level 4 and 5 incidents as measured by OORS reports. PS 134 will create and implement a school-wide social-emotional curriculum that is supported by monthly thematically SEL focused read-alouds, push-in sessions with guidance counselors and social workers. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The principal, assistant principal, guidance counselors and teacher leaders will attend professional development opportunities, (ie. Emotionally Responsive Practice, Restorative Circles, Therapeutic Crisis Intervention) to turn key information to grade teams, and eventually whole staff. Schedules and substitutes will be provided during training sessions for the classroom teachers that attend the training. The teacher leaders, guidance and administration will utilize the Monday PD periods to lead cycles of professional development, as well as build time through common prep times for teachers to offer training and additional support to colleagues to implement responsive practices in the classroom. The school will convene a weekly committee, spearheaded by guidance counselors, to monitor student behavior challenges on a weekly basis, to identify specific students and teachers who require additional support and community resources, including that of the Go Project, Henry Street School Based Social Work clinic. Administration and crisis team will develop and distribute a crisis guide and protocol to Staff and Aides to ensure consistent reporting, tracking, and follow-up of challenging behaviors, accidents and incidents. This guide shall be aligned with the Discipline Code and follow the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) and the Department of Health guidelines. A coherent de-escalation plan and school-wide behavioral expectations will be created and shared by staff to support working with students with disabilities and addressing the needs of English language Learners. Paraprofessionals will attend bi-weekly professional development with Henry Street Settlement Mental Health Clinic, along with two other District 1 schools for intervisitation and to develop a toolkit of strategies for managing students in crisis. Teacher leaders, administration, guidance 9/17/18 - 6/7/19 Teacher leaders, administration, guidance 9/17/18 - 6/7/19 Administration, Guidance Counselor, Director of School climate, other support personnel from MFSC Guidance counselors, administration, classroom teachers All students 9/17/18 - 6/7/19 Guidance counselors, administration Teacher leaders, administration, guidance 9/17/18 - 6/7/19 Guidance counselors, administration, classroom teachers All staff 9/17/18 - 6/7/19 Administration and all school staff Paraprofessionals 9/17/18 - 6/7/19 Administration, guidance counselor 8  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. School efforts on creating a supportive environment for community will be discussed and explored fully within a variety of parent engagement activities, including curriculum night (September 2018) lead by classroom teachers, parent workshops lead by classroom, intervention and support teachers during Parent Engagement afternoons, Principals' Breakfast (first Friday of each month) by the principal and assistant principal. Throughout these meetings, parents will be engaged in understanding the instructional approach and concrete steps and actions that parents can do at home to support their students' work and growth. Furthermore, parents will be provided with a template for constructing a written piece for sharing their hopes and dreams about their children. Our parent's visions for their children will be shared, considered and incorporated into PS 134's efforts in constructing relationships with our students and families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Funding two guidance counselor positions, whose role will include leading and facilitating an crisis intervention team. ● Partnership with CBO Henry Street Settlement, for the school-based clinic Social Worker, and University Settlement for a school-based social worker. ● Schedules will be adjusted to accommodate time for professional development for staff members both internally and externally. ● Substitutes will be hired to cover classrooms during this time. Before and after school meetings will be held with parents to distribute and explain crisis protocol in the school building. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all classrooms will have implemented 5 units around social emotional topics as determined by the professional development work of 2017-2018. By February 2019, the team will review the peer mediation and check -in protocols for effectiveness. OORS will be reviewed to determine any trends bi-monthly Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 9  Record input, feedback and attendance after each event. Record results from surveys. Review input and results in November 2018 and in February 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 34% of PS 134 students in grades 3-5 scored level 3 or above on the 2018 NYS CCLS Mathematics test. We know that more of our students are capable of demonstrating grade level proficiency in Mathematics. It was determined that classroom teachers need greater collaboration within the grade and across the grades to align intra- and inter-grade curriculum. In addition, there is a need for continuous professional development in differentiating instruction and in delivering effective lessons that meet all student needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in grades 3-5 will improve Mathematics achievement as measured by an increase from 34% to 421% the percentage of enrolled students scoring at level 3 or above in the 2018 NYS Grades 3-8 Common Core Mathematics tests. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The principal will create weekly common prep periods for classroom teachers and intervention specialists (at risk, ESL and SETSS teachers). In addition, the principal will align and organize structures for sharing best practices on Tuesday collaboration time for teachers to lead, facilitate and participate. The administration will facilitate inter-grade conversation and collaboration through assigning extended teacher planning time, to focus on inter-grade conversations on specific math units and concepts, to better align math curricula between grades. Specifically, the teachers will create start-of-year, mid-year and end-of-year math benchmark assessments to track student progress throughout the year and from year to year. The administration will collaborate monthly with teachers and facilitate greater data analysis and use in aligning their instruction with the CCLS aligned curricula and student needs. Student achievement data will include unit pre- and post-tests, conference notes and checklists as well as student class work and work samples. This information will help form subgroups of particular students that require additional attention and differentiated instruction, either via intervention, or academic enrichment. In addition, the past editions of the NYS CCLS Math test will be examined to review specific learning standards that posed challenges for the students. Through this analysis, teachers will identify specific content and skill strands that require additional supplementation from outside materials and boost instructional strategies to meet those needs .The data analysis will create common points of discussion, and collaboration to modify instruction between classroom teachers with SETSS, AIS, and ESL teachers, as well as related service providers. Student groupings will form the basis of effective and targeted use of centers, parallel teaching, flexible skills groups, as well as Title III interventions after school. Under the guidance and facilitation of the school administration, the grade teams will look at both student and teacher work to examine for higher levels of questioning, critical thinking and analytical skills. Teachers will meet by grade levels on a weekly Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 9/17/18 - 6/7/19 Administration Classroom teachers and intervention specialists (at risk, ESL and SETSS teachers) Classroom Teachers 9/17/18 - 6/7/19 School administration, teacher leaders School’s lowest 1/3 9/17/18 - 6/7/19 School administration, classroom teachers and intervention specialists (at risk, ESL and SETSS teachers Classroom Teachers 9/17/18 - 6/7/19 School administration, teacher leaders 2 basis to plan lessons, design assessments and develop units of study to align with the Common Core Learning Standards and the Citywide Instructional Expectations. Each grade will communicate with families on the instructional strategies, content and curricula work that the teachers and students are working on, as well as concrete ways that families can support their students at home through monthly classroom newsletters, individualized conferences, step-up meetings, and meet the teacher evenings. These strategies and support ideas will be echoed in the Principal's Parent Breakfast on a monthly basis. Students, Families 10/15/18 - 6/7/19 School administration, classroom teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school-wide instructional focus on writing and mathematics will be discussed and explored fully within a variety of parent engagement activities, including curriculum night (November, 2018) lead by classroom teachers, parent workshops lead by classroom, intervention and support teachers during Parent Engagement afternoons, Principals' Breakfast (first Friday of each month) by the principal and assistant principal. Throughout these meetings, parents will be engaged in understanding the instructional approach and concrete steps and actions that parents can do at home to support their students' work and growth. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Principal & assistant principal, data specialist, classroom general education teachers. ● SETSS, AIS, ESL and special education teachers. ● Structured and pre-scheduled collaborative planning time within the prep schedule, for not only grade teams, but also teams across grades and areas; modifying curriculum to meet student needs, identify additional resources needed, and reallocate the services of the AIS and intervention services. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in grades 3-5 scoring at level 3 & 4 as measured by the CCLS aligned mid-year grade benchmark assessments created by teachers in the 2017-2018 Math Towers, in comparison to start-of-year mathematics assessments. 3  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Grade-specific beginning/mid/end of year assessments, designed by school staff, benchmarked to the Common Core Learning Standards Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. To effectively lead the school community and to increase cognitive engagement for students and staff, the school administration saw the need for greater distributed leadership with the instructional staff. While in the past some teachers emerged as informal mentors and subject/grade leaders, it was imperative that they were formally recognized across the school and supported in their own professional growth to facilitate teacher team conversations about curriculum and teaching practice. The building of teacher capacity will have three instructional focuses for the year: 1- Alignment of curriculum in both Mathematics and English Language Arts 2- Data-driven instruction and 3- Planning and preparation with an emphasis on student agency. Teacher feedback from the 2018 Learning Environment Survey clearly outlined a need and desire for additional opportunities for inter-school visitations. The differentiated professional development plan will be constructed so that specific cycles of inquiry can be supported with intervisitation opportunities from the District 1 office. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all grades will be using Teachers College Reading and Writing Units of Study for English Language Arts. By June 2019, grades K-3 will be using GoMath and grades 4-5 will be using EngageNY curricula for Mathematics instructions. By June of 2019, all teachers will be using protocols to analyze data collected from benchmark assessments to inform their instruction and guide the planning for small-group and one-on-one instruction. Inter-visitations will support the actionable-steps taken based on the data-driven decisions. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Identify, and offer leadership opportunities to teachers through surveys, peer recommendations and self-identification; support newly emerged teacher leaders through professional development and leadership training. Establish 6 week cycles of professional development, identifying content areas, norms and work products of each cycle. School administration will conduct first two cycles of differentiated professional development on collaborative norms and effective professional partnerships, with the second focusing on teacher rounds around instructional methods. Through 1:1 conversations with staff members (in initial planning conferences as well as mid-year conversations), facilitate a larger conversation with the teaching staff, self-identifying strengths and challenges in their teaching craft; this information will serve as foundation for differentiated PD of sharing expertise within the school community. Teachers will facilitate professional development workshops during Monday PD sessions for their colleagues, based on self-identified needs as well as administration suggestion, establish norms of participation as well as end-products for each group of teachers. Families will be invited to parent workshops and skill-building seminars that result from staff professional development and outreach that address community needs and utilize community resources. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Staff members 9/17/18 - 6/7/19 School Administration Staff members 9/17/18 - 6/7/19 School Administration Staff members 9/17/18 - 6/7/19 School Administration Staff members 12/3/18 - 6/7/19 School Administration, teacher leaders Families 10/5/18 - 6/7/19 School Administration, teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The collaborative and collegial work between teachers and staff will be reported to the school community via various formats including the School Leadership Team, the Principal Breakfasts and parent engagement activities as appropriate. 6  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Principal, assistant principal & data specialist, classroom general education teachers. ● SETSS, AIS, ESL and special education teachers. ● Structured and pre-scheduled collaborative planning time within the prep schedule, Monday extended PD time for not only grade teams, but also teams across grades and areas; ● Expertise from staff developers from Manhattan Borough Field Office and Community School District 1, focusing on professional learning communities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school administration will organize, facilitate and participate in 1 cycle of differentiated professional development for staff members (Cycle 1); the teacher leaders will be identified and trained to assume leadership roles in the following the first cycle of classroom inter-visitations (Cycle 2) and 3 additional PD cycles (Cycles 3, 4 and 5). By February 2019, teachers will have completed two feedback forms to self-reflect, evaluate the effectiveness of the professional development, and describe next steps for their own learning, at the end of Cycle 1 and Cycle 2. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Staff member surveys, collected at end of each PD and inter-visitation cycle. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2018 Learning Environment Survey shows that only 39% of our families participated in the survey (as compared to 48% in 2017), which was a surprisingly low number and a missed opportunity for families to give formal feedback. Despite school efforts from previous year, it is clear that additional efforts are needed. As such, it established a clear need to increase parental engagement for all of our families in the work that the school community is doing for the success of our children. In the limited feedback as presented by the 2018 Learning Environment Survey, parents expressed a desire for greater participation and understanding of the work that occurs in the classroom, both instructionally and in celebration of student successes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parent communication will be improved as evidenced by a 20% parent participation rate on the 2019 Learning Environment Survey. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Create, consolidate and streamline monthly classroom newsletters to families with the monthly calendar, so that there is a consistency on where to find information on academics, upcoming events, and special opportunities. Focus staff attention on adding specific and concrete ways to support students at home. Collect parent email addresses and other electronic means of communication for bi-monthly principal letter to parents, as well as emergency e-blasts. Utilize Open School Week, Parent Teacher Conferences and other high percentage involvement efforts to gather data. Families 9/17/18 - 6/7/19 Families 9/17/18 - 6/7/19 Publicize monthly Principal’s Breakfast meetings through flyers, calendar and e-blasts, including year-long calendar, established agendas and addressed topics based on parental feedback. Families 9/17/18 - 6/7/19 Create bi-monthly opportunities (5 per grade over the school year) and invitations to families to specifically participate in their child's classroom to better understand instructional expectations and supports that parents can do at home. Families 9/17/18 - 6/7/19 School administration, parent coordinator, teachers School administration, parent coordinator, teachers School administration, parent coordinator, teachers School administration, parent coordinator, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The school community will also engage two school-based community based organizations - Henry Street Settlement and University Settlement - who have historically served the school community through after school programs. The school and the CBOs will collectively and collaboratively create strategies so that best-practices in reaching families in general, as well as specific families, can be shared on a monthly basis with a regularly scheduled meeting with the principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 9  ● Principal and assistant principal; ● classroom and specialist teachers; ● Tuesday extended day parental engagement time; ● Parent coordinator and family worker. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all newsletters will be streamlined with the monthly calendar; email addresses will be collected and the Principal's letter will be broadcast; three of the school-wide classroom invitation events will have occurred; a mid-point check will be conducted with the PA president and teacher leaders to assess success and adjustments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent surveys conducted at three Principal's Breakfasts (October, November and December 2018) to gather parent feedback on effectiveness of current practices, as well as parent knowledge of school communication efforts. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.)  Grades K-3: running record levels and writing assessments indicating at least one year delay  Grades 4-5: Level 1 and 2 on NYS ELA exam, running record levels and writing assessments, indicating at least one year delay Mathematics  Grade K-3:mid and end of unit assessments indicating level 1 or level 2 proficiency. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.)  Differentiate instruction, based on on-going assessments such as Fountas & Pinnell running records, in all grades.  Repeated readings, interactive writings, targeted instruction informed by item analysis of NYS ELA exam in grades 4-5  Guided reading, shared reading, phonemic mini-lessons.  Differentiate instruction in all math classes -- Tier I interventions Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.)  One on One  Differentiated Small Group  Push-in and Pull-out by AIS Specialist  Utilization of technology, such as SmartBoards, document cameras to assist visual learners  One on One Differentiated Small Group  Push-in and Pull-out by AIS Specialist  Utilization of technology, such as When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.)  During School Day  During School Day 1   Grade 4-5: Level 1 and 2 on the NYS Math exam in addition to mid and end of unit assessments indicating at least one year delay Science: Grades K-5: mid and end of unit assessment performance below level 2 Social Studies: Grades K-5: mid and end of unit assessment performance below level 2    Situational conflicts, problem solving gaps Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) SmartBoards, document cameras to assist visual learners  The science  Differentiated  During School Day  During School Day Small Group  Utilization of technology, such as SmartBoards, document cameras to assist visual learners  One on One  Differentiated Small Group  Push-in and Pull-out by AIS Specialist  Utilization of technology, such as SmartBoards, document cameras to assist visual learners  One on One  Differentiated  During School Day Small Group lab will be used as a vehicle to provide additional instruction to grades 3-5  Differentiate instruction in all social studies classes -- Tier I interventions  Provide guidance and crisis counseling services during the school day via the guidance counselor and social worker, one period a week or more frequently if needed, to 2  students in need of academic intervention services. 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) According to ATS data on June 27, 2018, 15 students are designated as students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The supports that we provide for our students in temporary housing include academic programs & educational support services, as offered by our AIS/intervention team; basic and emergency supplies as needed by the family; at-risk counseling support provided by our guidance counselors; resource support as offered by the social workers of Henry Street school-based mental health clinic that are embedded in our school community. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. PS 134 works continuously so that our teachers are Highly Qualified Teachers as outlined in state guidelines. This includes: ● Student teacher partnerships with New York University, Hunter College and other educational entities to recruit excellent candidates; ● New Mentor Committee to ensure that new teachers are welcomed and acclimated to their new school community, and followed with weekly mentor meetings; ● Appropriate teaching assignments as determined by their state licenses; ● Continual professional development through in-house structures (as well as outside pedagogical consultants; on-going professional development for the Advance program 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● The state and local measures of student learning, as well as the measures of teacher practice through the Advance program will shape and define the continued professional development of our highly qualified teachers. ● Teachers also participate in ongoing professional development for the new English Language Arts curriculum – Core Knowledge Learning and Expeditionary Learning on a monthly basis with grade experts turn-keying best practices to colleagues. ● In addition, the school staff will receive further professional development through professional networks as well as through the Manhattan Borough Field Office and Community School District 1. Part 3: TA Schools Only 6  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Our Pre-K teachers have developed a unique curriculum that dovetails the children’s experiences in pre-school to that of the PreK program here at PS 134, building upon the PreK for All Thrive curriculum. The curriculum in Kindergarten builds upon the work of Pre-K teachers and the students seamlessly. The Pre-K teachers participate in joint staff decision-making, weekly professional development and community activities. The students’ academic and social emotional records are transferred to the Kindergarten teachers to help them plan and assess for the success of the students in Kindergarten. The parents are actively involved in both the classrooms, as well as school-wide Principal’s Breakfast that is hosted by the principal, parent coordinator and family assistant. The early intervention work is coordinated by our school social worker and school psychologist. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The school teaching staff will lead the decision-making process for choosing, creating (where applicable), modifying current and utilizing assessments. The grade-wide and school-wide conversations will be facilitated by the school administration. Their selection and decision-making will drive the need for professional development. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount 7  each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 190,172 41,870 12,366 0 2,359,244 X X X X Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5C 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 8   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 134 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 134 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and science; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 0  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality PS 134’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Teacher Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 1  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 134, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 3  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act. Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 4  ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Based on independent reading levels and writing produced in the classroom, as well as We have identified the subgroups of ELLs&nbsp;we have, which include Newcomers, November 26, 2018 - April 13, 2018.&nbsp; 2 days a week, 2 hours a day&nbsp; 2:35-4:35 27 sessions total&nbsp; English&nbsp; Students will be grouped in three groups - K/1, 2/3, and 4/5.&nbsp; These groups will include a mix of ELLs&nbsp;from different subgroups. For Begin description here: Rationale: · the 2018 NYSESLAT&nbsp;scores and EDAT report, the school's objective is to supplement the writing skills of our ELLs&nbsp;using social studies and science using ENL methodology. Subgroups and Grade Levels of Students: · Developing ELLs, ELL-SWD, and SIFE.&nbsp; · · example,&nbsp; 4/5 group has a mix of SIFE, ELL-SWD, and Developing ELLs.&nbsp; Schedule and Duration: · · · · Language of Instruction: · # and Types of Teachers: · · · · · · · · Flow of 2 Hour Session:<!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> Center Cycles The cycles for each grade band will focus on writing through the content area (Science or Social Studies) based on grade level with an emphasis on the reading and speaking/listening as needed. Monthly Topics: December - Family and Culture January - Character Study February - Holidays and Celebrations March - Plant Life April - Review There will be 3 teachers in the program1 Gen Ed&nbsp;1 TESOL1 Special Ed 1 Gen Ed&nbsp; 1 TESOL 1 Special Ed The TESOL&nbsp;teacher will work with all students in the program.&nbsp; 1 Gen Ed&nbsp; 1 TESOL 1 Special Ed 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Students will study the following topics differentiated by grade and proficiency with a culmination project in April presented in writing and orally on one of the topics covered during the program. WRITING CENTER will include response to writing prompts, sentence frames and word banks, tiered vocabulary, sentence structure, organization, and clarity. Writing genres will include narrative, informational, opinion, and procedural. This is based on the social studies and science topic being studied that month. READING CENTER will include reading passages from NewsELA, Reading A-Z (already on-site and no cost to Title III), interactive read alouds (to be purchased with Title III funds), and shared reading. Comprehension strategies, academic vocabulary, and word work will be addressed. This is based on the social studies and science topic being studied that month. SPEAKING AND LISTENING CENTER will include student discussion around photo prompts, video response, and listening to passages, physical gesturing, and expression and intonation. This is based on the social studies and science topic being studied that month. Cost & Materials The materials to be used will only be used for Title III and during the duration of the program. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: Professional Development for School-Wide Program: Rationale: · ELLs&nbsp;vertically across the grades, with a particular focus on writing as per District 1's Advanced Literacy initiative&nbsp; Teachers to receive training: · well as speech and language providers will participate in the professional development cycles.&nbsp; · Information is then turnkeyed from those meetings.&nbsp; Schedule and Duration: · · teachers participating in our ELL Cohort (1 hour per month) Topics to be covered: Monday PDs&nbsp;- 6 week cycle inquiry group on ELL related topics Monthly professional development sessions during after-school will be provided to to engage teachers in collaborative planning that provided scaffolded&nbsp;support for The classroom teachers, including general education and special education teachers, as Training will also come the Manhattan Field Support Center ELL Department. 8  Alison Flores, ELL provider Pat Martone, ELL provider Patricia Purvis, Gen Ed Teacher No additional costs are necessary as the trainings as well as the expertise to conduct New Language Progressions / Targets of Measurement&nbsp; second language acquisition ELL strategies&nbsp; modifying units of study to meet needs of ELLs&nbsp; assessing ELLs&nbsp;throughout the year&nbsp; Part C: Professional Development · · · · · Name of provider: · · · Costs: · professional development are already embedded within the school staff.&nbsp; Professional Development for Title III service providers: Teachers to receive training: · Schedule and Duration: · · Topics to be covered: · · · · · Name of provider: · · · · Costs: · providers, as the costs are already embedded into the professional development plans of the school and District 1.&nbsp; Advanced literacy - writing focus&nbsp; FUNdations&nbsp;for Levels K and 1 Phonemic&nbsp;Awareness&nbsp; Curriculum Planning - Inquiry based&nbsp; Supporting ELLs&nbsp;with Generative Vocabulary&nbsp; The ENL Licensed Teacher and Common Branch Teacher outlined in Part B.&nbsp; ENL Lead Monthly District Meetings, full day professional development sessions 1 and 2 day professional workshop trainings&nbsp; Department of Literacy Department of AIS District 1 ELL Leads&nbsp; Showcase Schools No additional costs are planned for the professional development of the Title III program Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered 9  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities · · name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities PS 134 views parental involvement as an integral part of a child's educational In order to prepare our ELL families for the summer break, a&nbsp;workshop on During Parent Engagement Time: 2:35-3:05 January 8, 2019 January 29, 2019 March 5, 2019&nbsp; Begin description here: Rationale: · development and therefore want to involve parents in their child's education through hands-on, collaborative learning experiences. Schedule and Duration: · · · · Topics to be Covered: · Preventing Summer Slide is presented. This workshop, which is presented by the two licensed&nbsp;ENL&nbsp;teachers, focuses on the importance of students reading everyday over the summer in order to prevent their reading levels from sliding in September. Strategies of questions families can ask about the book students are reading are presented. These include: What is happening in your book so far? What do you think might happen next? Why do you think that? Additionally, information about the summer reading program at our local&nbsp;NYPL&nbsp;is presented at this workshop. Families can go to the library to register for their summer reading program and students will engage in various activities hosted by the public library.&nbsp;Additional support for our families are provided in small group coaching. For coaching, examples of as-needed topics covered in the parent coaching sessions include good strategies for successful parent-teacher conferences (November), &nbsp;navigating the middle school application process (December) and understanding NYS testing (January). These topics are honed to support the families of our ELLs, oftentimes who have not experienced them before. All meetings and gatherings are supported by having Mandarin and Spanish oral translations.&nbsp; · Preventing Summer Slide is presented. This workshop, which is presented by the two licensed&nbsp;ENL&nbsp;teachers, focuses on the importance of students reading everyday over the summer in order to prevent their reading levels from sliding in September. Strategies of questions families can ask about the book students are reading are presented. These include: What is happening in your book so far? What do you think might happen next? Why do you think that? Additionally, information about the summer reading program at our local&nbsp;NYPL&nbsp;is presented at this workshop. Families can go to the library to register for their summer reading program and students will engage in various activities hosted by the public library.&nbsp; · examples of as-needed topics covered in the parent coaching sessions include good strategies for successful parent-teacher conferences (November), &nbsp;navigating the middle school application process (December) and understanding NYS testing (January). These topics are honed to support the families of our ELLs, oftentimes who have not experienced them before. All meetings and gatherings are supported by having Mandarin and Spanish oral translations.&nbsp; Additional support for our families are provided in small group coaching. For coaching, In order to prepare our ELL families for the summer break, a&nbsp;workshop on 0 In order to prepare our ELL families for the summer break, a&nbsp;workshop on Additional support for our families are provided in small group coaching. For coaching, Part D: Parental Engagement Activities · Preventing Summer Slide is presented. This workshop, which is presented by the two licensed&nbsp;ENL&nbsp;teachers, focuses on the importance of students reading everyday over the summer in order to prevent their reading levels from sliding in September. Strategies of questions families can ask about the book students are reading are presented. These include: What is happening in your book so far? What do you think might happen next? Why do you think that? Additionally, information about the summer reading program at our local&nbsp;NYPL&nbsp;is presented at this workshop. Families can go to the library to register for their summer reading program and students will engage in various activities hosted by the public library.&nbsp; · examples of as-needed topics covered in the parent coaching sessions include good strategies for successful parent-teacher conferences (November), &nbsp;navigating the middle school application process (December) and understanding NYS testing (January). These topics are honed to support the families of our ELLs, oftentimes who have not experienced them before. All meetings and gatherings are supported by having Mandarin and Spanish oral translations.&nbsp; Name of Provider: · How Parents Will be Notified: · and concrete ways, such as using technology, in which they can be more involved in the school community. Letters are sent home in English, Mandarin, and Spanish to notify parents of the breakfasts, workshop sessions and activities. · each month. · used.&nbsp; Costs: · translation expertise and resources are already available within the building.&nbsp; At all school-wide events, parents are informed of events that are upcoming at the school Additionally, monthly calendars in the three languages are sent home at the beginning of We will contact the interpretation unit in the event that another language needs to be There are no additional costs associated with the parental engagement efforts, as Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Principal, Assistant Principal, ENL teachers and classroom teachers.&nbsp; Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. _____ _____ Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. _____ _____ 1 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 01 School Name Henrietta Szold School Borough Manhattan School Number 134 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Daniel Kim Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Alison Flores Teacher/Subject Area Patricia Purvis, 3rd Grade Teacher/Subject Area Patricia Martone, ENL Related-Service Provider Michelle Riggio Superintendent Carry Chan Assistant Principal Thao Vo Coach type here School Counselor Suzanne Blum Parent Eileen Delvalle Parent Coordinator Miriam Petrovitch Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 3  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 290 Total number of ELLs 30 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.34% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) NA K 1 2 3 4 Lang. NA NA Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The following are formative assessments / curriculum-embedded assessments using to guide instructional planning for ELLs: Formative: - Fountas and Pinnell Running Records (formal and informal)-Reading A-Z Language Skill Pack assessments-Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT practice tests-teacher-created vocabulary assessments by unit Summative: -Final Fountas and Pinnell Running Record -State assessments such as Math, ELA, and NYSESLAT -Go Math! chapter testsThe data has shown us that our entering and beginning ELLs are struggling to meet grade level benchmarks in reading and writing. We are focusing on reading development in standalone ENL and writing development in integrated ENL. We use the data from these assessment to form instructional groups that are targeted on specific strategies. Teachers collaborated with classroom teachers to help create scaffolds and differentiated instruction for our ELL students. General education teachers and ELL providers met weekly to review student data and create an achievable goal for students moving forward. ELL teachers also looked at both formative 4  and summative assessments to provide students with re-teachings and strategies they could use to gain mastery in that skill set. -ELL teachers created a curriculum to support all ELL students. They used teacher-created assessments and conferring to progress monitor student achievement during thematic units. The NYSESLAT writing rubric is used to evaluate ELLs' writing for each unit. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures we have in place to support this effort are:-school-wide online data tracking system in the Google Drive for Fountas and Pinnell Running Records-school-wide Weekly Notes that provide information on important due dates and deadlines -ELL department pacing calendar with unit start/end and assessment dates-incorporation of NYSESLAT test prep and balanced literacy Title III afterschool program -common teacher planning time for classroom teachers and ENL providers 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The summative assessments and baseline/benchmark assessments that are being used to identify baseline, progress, and areas of need for ELLs are:-NYSESLAT-TCRWP Primary Spelling Inventory-Fountas and Pinnell Running Records-TCRWP On Demand Writing -NYSITELL -DIBELS (universal screener) 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The structures we have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered are: -ELL Coordinator to ensure proper training, execution, and analysis of NYSITELL and NYSESLAT in order to create instructional action plans and groupings for students -creation of ELL Cohort inquiry team that analyzes data from TCRWP On Demand Writing in order to create strategy groups and Tier II interventions in the classroom -using TCRWP Primary Spelling Inventory to progress monitor student growth for ELLs targeted for Tier II who are struggling with decoding based on F&P results -using DIBELS as a screener to progress monitor student growth for ELLs targeted for Tier II who are struggling with comprehension based on F&P results -Supplemental Title III Program has been revised to focus on student need as indicated by the EDAT report and is being designed as a supplemental intervention (focusing on balanced literacy) 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention Framework by:-using TCRWP Primary Spelling Inventory to progress monitor student growth for ELLs targeted for Tier II who are struggling with decoding based on F&P results -using DRA to progress monitor student growth for ELLs targeted for Tier II who are struggling with comprehension based on F&P results -adjusting our Title III after school program focus to target ELLs in need of intervention by using data from the EDAT and F&P Running Records-Staff accesses and uses the data to drive instruction and differentiate instruction by looking at data during team meetings, collaboration between ELL providers and classroom teachers, data shared school-wide at professional development sessions, and adjusting lessons and instructional groups based on that data during planning sessions 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT, New York State ELA and Math, as well as the NYS 4th Grade Science tests inform the work that we do with our students. Their performance in the respective tests help fine tune the objectives for each student. Where applicable, the Item Analyses from the respective tests help refine our work with individual students, as well as groupings of the students. As per the results of the 2017 NYSESLAT, we have noticed that: As per the results of the 2017 NYS tests, we have noticed that: These results have impacted our ENL programming in the following ways: 5  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The structures we have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to our programs are:-Weekly ELL Team Meetings with ENL service providers to analyze data and make instructional adjustments -Monthly Cabinet Meetings with administration where data can be presented and analyzed -ELL Coordinator weekly administrative periods so data can be aggregated and analyzed using EDAT and Google Drive -school-wide Professional Developments from the District for ELL Lead/ELL Coordinator Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In our Freestanding ENL Program, we address the following as per CR Part 154.2:Integrated ENL-One ENL service provider pushes into grades K, 1, and 2 during ELA for 180 minutes a week-A second ENL service provider pushes into grade 3, 4, 5 during ELA for 180 minutes a weekStandalone ENL-One ENL service provider pulls out Entering and Emerging ELLs from grades K-4 for 180 minutes a week (with no more than 2 contiguous grades per group)-A second ENL service provider pulls out Entering and Emerging ELLS from grade 5 for 180 minutes a week (with no more than 2 contiguous grades per group) Student Grouping-ELLs of all levels are placed heterogeneously into their grade class and mixed with native speakers -ELLs with ICT on their IEPs are placed into the appropriate class setting -For Standalone ENL, ELLs are placed into homogeneous groups (Entering and Emerging) and are from two contiguous grades b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not Applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The school ensures the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency level, with explicit instructional minutes delivered in ENL and ELA, by: -using NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data to inform instructional grouping based on proficiency level-scheduling Entering and Emerging ELLs for 360 total minutes - 180 integrated in ELA, 180 standalone in ENL-scheduling Transitioning and Expanding ELLs for 180 total minutes integrated in ELA-Scheduling Commanding ELLs for 90 total minutes integrated in ELA-Programming provider schedules into STARS ClassroomWe use data from the EDAT report to support our instructional groupings as well based on areas of need in each modality. For example, we learned that a major area of growth across the grades was writing so we developed our integrated program around writing instruction. HL is supported by pairing students with the same HL into groups to allow for thought processing in the HL before expressing those thoughts in English. Books in the HL as well as the use of cognates are instructional supports provided to ELL students. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in our Freestanding ENL Program with specific regard to the following:Language of Instruction- EnglishInstructional Approaches and Methods -Integrated: co-teaching during Writer's Workshop using various co-teaching 6  models, small strategy groups, explicit vocabulary teaching, vocabulary mini-books, modeling, linguistic frames, oral rehearsal, cognates, mixed level language partners, CCLS aligned units -Standalone: explicit language instruction through a thematic lens (social studies or science), focusing on linguistic frames, pre-teaching vocabulary, visual supports, TPR, cognates, oral rehearsal, cooperative learning structures, use of videos/songs/realia, CCLS aligned units that align with units of study in the general classroom-Ensuring language objectives are present in every lesson for both classroom and ENL teachers 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year by:-administering the Spanish LAB when the student registers if the home language is Spanish-translated state exams-bilingual glossaries -use of cognates in assessing comprehension -same HL partnerships and peer feedback during book discussions, class discussions, etc. -oral and written translation support from paraprofessionals, teachers, and other pedagogues in the building with regard to communication with the ENL and classroom teachers 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We differentiate instruction for each of the ELLs subgroups in the following ways:SIFE -provide social, emotional, and cultural support through culturally sensitive curriculumSupport from the guidance counselor, social worker, and parent coordinator -buddy system with students who speak their language and/or are from their country-increased use of modeling, visuals, and collaborative learning activities -receive Tier II RTI instruction in the classroom -support from CBOs (Henry Street Settlement, Studio in a School)-online websites applications for supplementary support in ELDNewcomer-buddy system with students who speak their language and/or are from their country-increased use of modeling, visuals, and collaborative learning activities -online websites applications for supplementary support in ELD-use of scaffolds such as linguistic frames and cognates-use of L1 to support development of L2 -use of Bilingual Common Core Progressions and Performance Level Descriptors to design tasks appropriate to the entering and emerging levels, such as pre-taught words and graphic organizers Developing-use of Bilingual Common Core Progressions and Performance Level Descriptors to design tasks appropriate to the entering and emerging levels, such as pre-taught words and graphic organizers -continued use of modeling, visuals, and collaborative learning activities -continued use of linguistic frames and explicit Tier II and III vocabulary instructionLong Term-use of Bilingual Common Core Progressions and Performance Level Descriptors to design tasks appropriate to the -entering and emerging levels, such as pre-taught words and graphic organizers -continued use of modeling, visuals, and collaborative learning activities -continued use of linguistic frames and explicit Tier II and III vocabulary instruction-intense focus on academic language across subject areas Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status-continued use of linguistic frames and explicit Tier II and III vocabulary instruction-intense focus on academic language across subject areas -receive 90 minutes of ENL service for 2 years during ELA as per data analysis from final NYSESLAT, state exams, and teacher input 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies and grade-level materials that teachers of ELLs-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development are:-use of manipulatives-use of tactile and kinesthetic activities-activating prior knowledge-extended wait time-pre-teaching and front-loading vocabulary-explicit instruction with visuals-breaking down tasks into smaller chunks-re-teaching and paraphrasing when appropriate-TCRWP for literacy instruction-library book sets for content based language instruction-Reading AZ for ELD support -thematic units (science and social studies based integrated with ELA) that directly connect to our community 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 7  Our school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment by:-having an ICT class on each grade and placing ELL-SWDs into that class if their IEP mandates an ICT-having special education teachers from each grade provide SETSS in the classroom for ELL-SWDs if their IEP mandates SETSS -using grade level instructional materials and providing scaffolds and differentiation to meet the needs of ELL-SWDs (Bilingual Common Core Progressions, Performance Level Descriptors) -having ELL service providers review IEPs for ELL-SWDs and attend their IEP meetings to stay updated on any amendments made to the IEP 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA and math are:ELA-LLI (Leveled Literacy Intervention) for comprehension and fluency-FUNdations for phonemic awareness -Florida Center for Reading Research for all 5 pillars of readingMath-Go Math! RTI resources The range of intervention services offered in our school are:-Tier 2 and 3 interventions provided by out of classroom RTI providers-Title III Supplemental RTI for ELLs afterschool program launching for the 17-18 SY All of these services are offered in English and use specific, streamlined progress monitoring. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on data and trends, there are new programs and improvements that will be considering for the upcoming school year. These are:New Program-Title III Afterschool program designed to engage students in core literacy skills through their interests in art, music, and theatre arts Improvements-incorporating a phonemic awareness program into the Standalone ENL service as the first unit for entering and emerging students to support foundational reading skills -increased collaborative planning time with classroom teachers for Integrated ENL-increased focus on vocabulary instruction, including pre-teaching, vocabulary books, and tier II and III academic language-increased focus on reading during Standalone ENL service and multiple choice questioning -use of NYSESLAT rubrics (teacher and student versions) throughout the year to better meet the language demands of the assessment through regular instruction throughout the year 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. English language learners at P.S. 134 are afforded equal access to all school programs by: 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials, including technology, that are used to support ELLs (for core content and language) are:-Smartboards / Promethean boards for visual support during lessons - iPads for visual and audio support during small group instruction - headphones for audio support during small group instruction -manipulatives (math manipulatives, magnetic letters, fluency tubes, etc) as a tactile support during lessons -photo cards (National Geographic and teacher created) as a visual support during lessons -folders, notebooks, writing paper, and other basic classroom supplies-sentence strips to support syntax development -index cards for vocabulary books-curriculum materials (workbooks, practice pages, guided reading books, etc) -document camerasInstructional Core-TCRWP for literacy-FUNdations for phonics-Teacher created shared reading based off of TCRWP 5 day plan-Learning AZ (Reading, Writing, Science) for supplemental support -teacher-created thematic units 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 8  Home language support is assessed and delivered in our ENL program in the following ways:-Spanish LAB for ELLs whose home language is Spanish-use of L1 as needed for entering, emerging, and transitioning students-use of cognates to support language acquisition -bilingual glossaries and dictionaries 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs' ages and grade level by:-having an ELL coordinator oversee the ENL program and collaborates with ELL department and Instructional Cabinet with regard to service and resources-using the ELL Policy and Reference Guide to ensure services as meeting mandates as per CR 154-programming all required services into STARS Classroom-using instructional resources that are research based and leveled appropriately 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Not applicable. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In order to assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school and throughout the school year, our school will host the following activities: -Parent Orientation for all newly enrolled ELLs hosted by ELL providers -Back to School Night hosted by classroom teachers and ELL providers -Community Welcome Event co-hosted by ELL department, guidance team, and parent coordinator for families and students -Exemplary student on each grade level to serve as a mentor/buddy for newly enrolled ELLs -Extra periods weekly of technology-based foundational skill support -parent involvement with ENL program through the PTA, SLT, and school advisory board -Annual ELL Parent meetings in June 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The school currently does not offer any language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school, including teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff, with support for engaging ELLs in the Common Core Learning Standards, are as follows:-monthly district level professional development from the BFSC for ELL Liaisons (September - June)-ELL PD offerings from the BFSC and DOE for ELL providers on different levels of ELL development, scaffolds to use, differentiation strategies, resources to use for lesson planning, writing language objectives, and more (September - June) -in-house professional development on social-emotional well-being of all students through professional text study and class intra-visitiations (September - December)-in-house professional development during ELL cohort meetings during the inquiry group cycle (January - April) 9  -in-house professional developing with ENL staff and classroom teachers for curriculum planning (May-June) -child study inquiries for para-professionals (September - June) -training for office staff through district and city-wide PDs on ELL-related topics 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school meets the professional development requirement as per CR Part 154.2 (15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for ENL teachers) in providing ELL-specific professional development by ensuring the following:-the ELL coordinator is a part of the Instructional Cabinet to make sure the percentage of ELL-specific professional development is met -in-house PDs for all staff members are on ELL-specific topics and are presented by the ELL Lead-ELL providers are sent to out of house PDs to meet their percentage quota -agendas and attendance are maintained for all professional development sessions and housed in the ELL Coordinator's binder -records will be kept with agenda and sign in sheets housed in one binder PD Topics include:-Scaffolds for ELLs-Differentiation for ELLs-Writing Language Objectives-Creating Strategy Groups based on Data -Using Technology for ELLs in Lesson Planning Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas in the following ways:-providing oral and written translation in the preferred language of the parent/guardian-using a rubric based progressing monitoring sheet to capture feedback regarding students' growth -holding the meetings during the month of May in order to be able to speak to their progress, growth, and approximated performance on the NYSESLAT -having a family associate who is fluent in multiple dialiects of Chinese -having a parent coordinator who is fluent in Spanish -meeting with parents regarding intervention services as well as Title III services -ongoing, frequent informal parent communication which are kept on a parent log housed on the shared Google drive 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parent involvement in our school includes:-a bilingual parent coordinator that proactively interacts with all parents of ELLs -multilingual parent associate that proactively interacts with all parents of ELLs -partnership with Children's Aid Society to support hosting events -translators present at all engagement activities -ENL classes for parents -in-classroom workshops for parents to work with students-multi-cultural day (school-wide) for parents to participate in -heritage celebration for students and parents -monthly parent breakfasts co-hosted by school leadership and teachers -SLT and PA that sponsor monthly events open to all families -parent involvement in our CBOs, such as Cookshop and Food Bank of NY 0  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Daniel Kim, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 134 School DBN: 01M134 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Daniel Kim Thao Vo Title Principal Assistant Principal Miriam Petrovitch Parent Coordinator Alison Flores ENL/Bilingual Teacher Eileen Delvalle Parent Patricia Martone/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Patricia Purvis/3rd Grade Teacher/Subject Area NA NA Coach Coach Suzanne Blum School Counselor Carry Chan Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Michelle Riggio Other SETSS Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/05/2017 09/05/2017 09/05/2017 09/05/2017 09/05/2017 09/05/2017 09/05/2017 09/05/2017 09/05/2017 09/05/2017 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 01M134 School Name: PS 134 Henrietta Szold Superintendent: D. Phillips The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Family Worker and Parent Coordinator review all student and family information, including the Home Language Survey, for students from Pre-Kindergarten to 5th grade. This information serves to help determine which families require language translation services - be it in oral, written and/or both - and in which language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 4 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language PS 134M familes require oral and written translations in Spanish, and the Chinese dialects of Mandarin and Cantonese. The findings have been reported to the School Leadership Team and the school staff in general through the faculty conferences. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. PS 134M sends monthly family newsletters from each grade, which outlines the classroom curriculum, as well as calendars for upcoming events and important deadlines. This is translated into both Spanish and Chinese for our families. The translation is done by our teaching and office staff, including the Parent Coordinator (Spanish) and Family Associate (Chinese). The flyers and notices for the monthly Principal's Breakfast is also translated in both Spanish and Chinese. All announcements and principal letters home, including notices for Parent Teacher Conferences, Curriculum nights, invitations for school-wide student performances, step-up meetings for next year's grades are all 5  reviewed, translated and sent home in languages appropriate for our families. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? PS 134M hosts the start of the year Curriculum Night in September, and Step-Up meetings in May/June with oral translation. In addition, the principal hosts monthly parent breakfasts that are orally translated, with handouts in written translations where applicable. Parent Teacher Conferences are scheduled with families with the staff language translations for the families. The guidance counselor and attendence teachers utilize the in-house staff translations as needed throughout the year. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 6   Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All notification is always translated into Spanish and Chinese with names and phones numbers of staff members who can assist parents if they have a question, concern, comment or need additional information in their native language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents will be polled monthly at the Principals' Parent Breakfast to address any specific or general concerns/comments or feedback regarding translations. In addition, the information gathered from the Parent Survey will help guide school policies and approach regarding translation services and support. 7 
