 02M135 School Name: THE URBAN ASSEMBLY SCHOOL FOR EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT Principal: ROBERT MAGLIARO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Urban Assembly School for Emergency Management 31020011135 9-12 411 Pearl Street, New York NY 10038 School Number (DBN): 02M135 212-225-0998 Phone Number: 212-225-0996 Fax: Joshua Garcia garcia@uasem.org Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Robert Magliaro Naomi Sharlin JulissaBrenes Elise Ritter Edwin Negron Aniah Harrison Emmanuel Batista N/A District Information Affinity Schools CUNY/UA Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: Fred Walsh Superintendent: 333 7 th Ave, Room 708, New York , NY 10001 FWalsh@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 356 – 3754 Phone Number: 212-356-7514 Fax:   Affinity FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-5618 Phone Number: (212) 356-7564 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Robert Magliaro Naomi Sharlin Julissa Brenes Elizabeth Oliver Edwin Negron Aniah Harrison Emmanuel Batista Not Applicable Laura Singleton Falynn Newman *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Member/ UFT UFT   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jacqueline Thomas Ali Azail YvetValentin Elected Parent Elected Parent Elected Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our Mission: The Urban Assembly School for Emergency Management provides students with authentic and rigorous learning experiences that empower them with the skills to succeed in college, career, and citizenship. Using the lens of Emergency Management to drive classroom, project, and work-based learning, students develop the confidence to pursue their dreams and the character to serve their communities.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Urban Assembly School for Emergency Management (UASEM) was founded as a Career and Technical Education (CTE) high school in 2013, and serves students in grades 9 through 12. The school offers courses in Emergency Management courses such as Emergency Medicine, Computer Science and Introduction to Law, in addition to the traditional high school curricula. The UASEM student body is 58% Hispanic, 29% Black, 6% Asian, and 7% white. Students with Disabilities (SWD) make up 18% of our student body, and English language learners (ELL), 4%. The majority of students are eligible for free or reduced lunch. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 4% English Language Learner (ELL), and 18% Special Education. Approximately, 88% of students enter the school reading below grade level. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. UASEM has five stated goals and areas of focus for the 2018-19 school year. Our goals are directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools, a continuation from our 2017-18 Comprehensive Education plan (CEP), feedback from our School Quality Reviews (SQR) and our School Snapshot. Our school has successfully continued and maintained a supportive and collaborative environment as evidenced by the Principal's 2017-18 MoLP and 2017-18 School Survey. However, credit accumulation, attendance, and parent engagement continue to be at the forefront of the work and the primary focus for the 2018-19 school year as indicated by STARS, the RYIS/RGAR report, and PCAR respectively . The development of a teacher led Professional Development focused on engagement and equity has resulted in growth in teacher effectiveness in Domain 3 of the Danielson Framework as indicated by 2017-18 TeachBoost heat map reports and an overall increase in credit accumulation in the 2017-18 school year as measured by the RHCC report . Our focus for the 2018-19 school year will be to continue to improve engagement and equity through grade specific student support, department specific task development support and pedagogy through instructional rounds' team support as measured by increases in credit accumulation to 88% (RHCC), student attendance to 86% (RYIS/RGAR) and increased parent engagement at SLCs to 60% (PCAR). 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M135 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 281 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 5 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 37 40 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 81.0% % Attendance Rate 76.9% % Reduced Lunch 5.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 59.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.23 0% 18% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 91% 74% 67.0% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 40 39 7 81.4% 4.6% 20.6% 29.5% 6.4% 1.8% 4 41% 5.3 N/A N/A 92% 81% N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  School leaders ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for all learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards as evidenced by a ‘Well Developed’ rating on SQR indicator 1.1  Teacher pedagogy is developed from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products (Source SQR indicator)  Across classrooms, teaching practices are aligned to the curricula and reflect a set of adopted instructional priorities about how students learn best as observed in student work products and purposeful small group discussions. (Source SQR indicator 2.1)  Across classrooms, teachers use or create assessments, rubrics, and have adopted a grading policy uniformly implemented in all classes. Additionally, common assessments are administered in all courses to measure student progress. (Source SQR indicator 2.2) School Wide structures that allow effective teachers to coach peers and provide non-administrative support during common planning time, peer observations, peer debriefs, and professional development   The instructional capacity of teachers is increased through the promotion of instructional strategies during analysis of student work samples leading to improved progress for groups of students.(Source SQR indicator 4.2)  Teachers receive immediate feedback in ongoing classroom observations conducted by school administration in a model of shared exemplary leadership. Teachers are held accountable to the standards of Danielson Framework for Teaching (Overall Well Developed rating on MoLP 2017-18) Needs:  Strengthen teacher pedagogy in the implementation of high quality instructional supports so that the vast majority of teachers strategically provide opportunities for learning extensions so that all learners are meaningfully engaged in rigorous tasks and rich discussions. (2015-16 MoLP)  Work with teachers to develop a common understanding of rigor across all contents. Be sure that teachers consistently leverage strategies such as inquiry, collaborative learning, questioning, and multiple access points to promote student to student discussion and high levels of thinking. Look to expand the number of teacher videos that highlight best practices across the school and continue to support teachers with live coaching opportunities between for-stakes observations. (Source 2015 QR, 2016 MOLP) 2   Ensure all teachers engage in ongoing checks for understandings so they may address student confusion in the moment (MoLP 2017-18) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will refine our reading and writing data analysis and targeted math instruction for all students, as evidenced by an increase of 5% in the percentage of students meeting college readiness benchmarks in both ELA and Math Regents, from 39% to 44%. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Teachers, Students 9/4-6/23 Administration, Instructional Cabinet (Department Leads)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Departments Teams: meet bimonthly to focus on content specific task development using both assessment data to inform planning as well as the criteria for Rigorous and Relevant Tasks at UASEM. In the beginning of the school year departments will unpack June 2018 ISA data to determine content and skill standards to focus on across the department. The focus will be using the assessment data to create rigorous and relevant tasks with the appropriate supports for all students to master the aligned learning target. Departments will also look at subgroup breakdowns to determine groups of students that need additional support and differentiation. READY Exams: all summative assessments will be aligned to Regents standards so teachers can monitor students performance throughout the year. In January and May students will take full length "READY" exams (either previously administered Regents and/or New Visions practice exams) to determine student overall readiness for the January/June regents and guide instruction around trends found in the skills item analysis. Departments will analyze the data to zero in on skills selected in the beginning of the year analysis and subgroups. Algebra Action Plan: for 2018-19 there is a robust algebra action plan to support UASEM Algebra instruction. This includes working with the UA Algebra Success Program which includes curriculum development, an algebra specific PLC, and bimonthly coaching; Hollyhock Fellowship focused on equity in Math Education; weekly tailored professional development for curriculum development around rigorous and relevant tasks; monthly evaluative and non-evaluative supervisory observations; interim data analysis using full length regent exams 4  Instructional Cabinet: The team consists of administration and effective teachers across grades and content areas. The team is responsible for creating differentiated Professional Development in the form of Instructional Rounds with the focus on the school wide Problem of Practice using CEP goals as the measures of progress. The team will continue to use relevant data to adjust and implement weekly professional development based in the Instructional Rounds theory. The team will develop weekly professional development sessions that focus on identifying a problem of practice within the larger school goal of ‘Increasing all student engagement in rigorous and relevant tasks’. Teachers will use the researched based protocols for instructional rounds and adjust to live at the teacher to teacher level. Increasing the rigor of daily tasks to at least Regents standards expectations so that students are prepared for College Ready success in the January and June administrations. Observation and Supervision: Administration will conduct observations with actionable and timely feedback in a 3 week cycle. Teacher observations will be done specifically focusing on teachers’ highest leverage area of need aligned to their Instructional Round Focus. The feedback protocol will always include scholarship data specifically around predicted credit accumulation and mastery of aligned learning targets. Teacher Leadership Development: facilitators are department leads who are effective teachers. They will meet with administration over the summer to design the launch have PDs with administration on facilitating evidence based critical conversations using student achievement data. The Instructional Cabinet will run an instructional rounds with administration in the first weeks of school as a model to lead their teams. The Instructional cabinet will meet with administration once per month to review relevant data and make adjustments throughout the year. For all team meetings teachers will review progress towards CEP goal(s) in 6 week cycles Data Collection and Monitoring: Student Level: READY PASSPORTS are printed and unpacked with each student in CTE classes 3 times per year with scholarship, 5  attendance, and assessment (READY) data. Grade level "crew" leaders will take intensive follow-up steps for specific students around READY data. Teacher Team Level: The IR group will look at student work as evidence of student mastery and impact in 4 week cycles. IR groups also focus on "STAR" students that represent the demographics of the subgroups determined in the beginning of the year analysis. Department Teams will look specifically at student mastery of Aligned Learning Targets, through standard assessment data to make instructional adjustments two times every month. Instructional Cabinet Level: School wide benchmarks towards CEP Goal once each month. All teachers will present their work and outcomes around a problem of practice including their evidence based impacts to the staff every 6 to 8 weeks All Teachers Every 6 to 8 weeks Administration, Instructional Cabinet (Department Leads) Whole staff will do a deep data dive into the 2017-18 data, unpack the goals of 2018-19 and how that aligns to their actionable goals. Staff will use the trends to inform instructional planning. 9/4 Principal, APs, Instructional Cabinet (Department Leads) All Teachers, Students, Students with Disabilities, and English Language Learners, and teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through a school-wide SBO teachers have every Wednesday to communicate with parents. Grade teams divide up the grade rosters into "crews" so that one adult is following up with individual families regularly around attendance, credit, assessment and social emotional data. Bimonthly the entire grade team meets to develop action plans which include outreach to parents. Families will be invited to Parent Association meetings once a month to participate in deliberate workshops and to get updates on school performances, progress, and special events. Focused workshops will be held once a month to 6  support families in understanding each course's scope and sequence, college application process, understanding their child's transcript, and in implementing academic action plans for students. Parent Coordinator, College Guidance Counselor, Partnership Coordinator, Social Worker, and school leadership will support the development of workshops and meetings in collaboration with teachers. Teachers reach out to parents of their target students every other week regarding their progress towards college and career readiness. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  24 hours of per-session to train new staff members on instructional priorities  20 hours of summer per session for College Access 4 All and Instructional Cabinet leaders to design and review PD with school administration  Approved SBO allows for weekly professional development meetings with whole staff for structured professional learning and student data analysis/student intervention planning  Department time allocated through SBO which allows for common planning on rigorous and relevant tasks and student data analysis  48 hours of per-session for Parent Workshops for school guidance counselor, teachers, and social worker  40 hours per semester for extended school day academic intervention services to support bottom third and Regents Prep  40 hours of per session for the year to run winter/spring break credit recovery programs  20 hours of classroom coverage funds to allow for teacher intervisitation both internally and at other schools with best practices Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will refine our reading and writing data analysis and targeted math instruction for all students, as evidenced by an increase of 5% in the percentage of students meeting college readiness benchmarks in the January 2019 ELA and Math Regents from 39% to 44%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Administration, Instructional Cabinet, and teacher teams will review scholarship data and assessment data at each progress report intervals (two times per marking period) to determine and predict credit accumulation rates for each grade, and make strategic plans to support students through engagement and differentiation in their classrooms. In September/October departments will examine June 2018 Regents data that serves as baseline data and allow departments to focus in on several "power standards" and subgroups of students. January and May department will review READY exam data (either previously administered regents or New Visions practice assessments) and make instructional adjustments around the power standards and subgroups. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths:    Full time partnership coordinator staffed to ensure students participate in enrichment after school activities. 100% of students participated in at least one work-based learning activity and students averaged a total of 54 hours of work-based learning interactions per student (Source: Urban Assembly Data Dashboard) Full time social worker to support grade team meetings, peer mediation, and mandated counseling Full time College Counselor to support students’ transition out of high school. One hundred percent of graduating seniors had a post-secondary plan  Recipient of five year Extended School Day/ School Violence Prevention Grant  Community Based Organizations supporting college and career readiness (Creative Connections, Groundswell Mural Painting, Drum Line music program, etc)  Culture building efforts are articulated by a theory of action, normed and cultural expectations or researched based character building practices that embedded. Interactions between school community members within all school spaces are respectful and student voice contributes to school wide decisions (MoLP 2017-18) Needs:  Improved attendance, attendance for 2017-18 was 81.4%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, we will effectively engage with families around the impact of attendance on student achievement, and will build students' sense of responsibility for their leaning, as evidenced by a 5% increase in the number of students with 90% and above attendance from 55% to 60%. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Attendance Team: led by the Assistant Principal, the attendance team monitors attendance at a variety of levels. The team is comprised of the Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Attendance Teacher, School Aid, and Partnership Coordinator. The team monitors daily attendance and identifies students who trend below the 90% goal. The team meets weekly to discuss specific students and evaluate impact. They conduct daily outreach via personalized phones call, school messenger, REMIND, JupiterGrades, and email. The team also works on discharging students ad correcting attendance. More intensive interventions are taken by the school's Guidance Counselor, especially for students who are on her caseload. The school's Partnership Coordinator ensures all students are involved in at least one extracurricular activity and connects students to enrichment opportunities that interest him/her. The Partnership Coordinator also creates celebrations such as our perfect attendance boards and Friday Flash newsletter which celebrates students. Grade Teams: each grade team divides the grade roster up into "crews" among teachers. Teacher "crews" leaders monitor their "crews" attendance throughout the year. Students with attendance between 60 and 89% receive more intensive interventions from their crew leaders through individualized plans, daily check-ins, phone calls and conferences with parents, and incentives for improved attendance. Crew leaders also facilitate biannual Student Led Conferences, which offer an opportunity to work with parents to see the impact attendance has on a student's academic performance. Crew leaders receive attendance support and training bimonthly during parent-outreach time where they can collaborate with the other grade teachers and work with the UASEM attendance team. Grade teams also plan community wide celebrations such as town halls and trips that recognize students who show improved and/or outstanding attendance. All students 9/4 to 6/23 Assistant Principal Parents and families Attendance Teacher Parent Coordinator School Aid Partnership Coordinator Guidance Counselor Social Worker All Students 9/4 - 6/23 Administration All teachers Students with 60 to 90 percent attendance Weekly parent outreach time through school SBO Grade Teams Guidance Counselor Parent Coordinator Partnership Coordinator Bimonthly Grade Team Meetings 9  Student Led Conferences: twice per year students will prepare presentations around their attendance, academic achievement, and college and career readiness for their parents as part of student led conferences. This will come in the form of a career plan as aligned to the CDOS plus one standards. Teachers will schedule parents for twenty minute blocks for the meeting. During conferences parents will have the opportunity to participate in other workshops and meet with social/emotional support staff as necessary. During the Fall September parent/teacher conference students and staff will be invited to the school for a curriculum night. The May 9 parent teacher conferences will be held for parents whose child is promotion in doubt. Workshops and individualized conferences will be developed by the SIT and grade teams Parent Workshops and Parent Association Meetings will focus on developing activities that are of high interest to parents/students and make the explicit connection between attendance, academic success, and college and career readiness. This includes college awareness and applications, attendance workshops, family BBQ and potluck, Student Led Conferences, Transcript Overview Workshops, Extra-Curricular Opportunities, Summer Opportunities, Jupiter Grades Training, etc. 9th grade students meet in advisory two to three times per week using the Circles of Power and Respect framework and conduct advisory based on curriculum that targets the school’s R.E.A.D.Y. core values, college and career choices, emotional well-being, collaboration, and community building. In 2018-19 UASEM will be utilizing Peer Health Exchange to help student develop positive relationship skills which will them them more likely to have positive interactions at school. SIT Team: SIT team will develop Tier 2/3 academic and social/emotional interventions. These interventions will then be turn-keyed to grade teams. All students Sept 26, Nov 29-30, March 7-8, May 9 Grade Team Leaders Teachers Parents/Families Administration Parent Coordinator Guidance Counselor Social Worker All Students 9/6-6/23 Parent Coordinator Parents and Families 9th Grade Students 9th Grade Advisors Peer Health Exchange Social Worker 0  Students in Lower Third Students with high number of referrals or incidents Chronically Absent Students Principal Assistant Principal Special Education Coordinator Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Approved SBO designates Wednesday mornings as Parent Engagement time. This allocated time allows for bi-monthly, monthly parent engagement supports for teachers, and time prior to the start of the school day for parent/teacher conferences, parent meetings with guidance counselors, social worker and/or administration. Additionally, family outreach will be supported through online grading system, mass mailing, phone messenger, and "REMIND," a text based outreach system to encourage two-way communication. In 2018-19 the school will use a google calendar, centrally managed by the parent coordinator, to track parent outreach and schedule parent/teacher conferences across the school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SBO for structured staff professional learning and student data/intervention planning  Materials for parent workshops including mailing, flyers, tools, handouts, and student data reports  Training and support for CA4All and instructional cabinet leaders   20 hours of per session for "Crew" meetings and planning outside of the school day  Extended school day for academic interventions and student enrichment activities  5 hours of supervisory per-session a week to support planning and monitoring of attendance initiatives  $12000 in funding for attendance initiatives and per session for planning, implementation, monitoring and attendance incentives including end of year trip  5 hours of per session a week for Student Implementation Team to meet with school administration  1 hour of guidance per session per week to meet with school administration  SBO for structured parent outreach and bimonthly grade team meetings where staff focus on attendance and "crew" planning and celebrations Jupitergrades online grade book system  DexPro   Remind: Two way texting application for families and school.   MailChimp for Friday Flash communication  Google Calendar School messenger 1  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students and families will develop an understanding of the impact of attendance on student progress towards college and career as evidenced by a 5% increase in students with 90% attendance and above from 55% to 60%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Student Intervention Team will meet monthly to review school wide attendance data as provided by Jupitergrades (teacher logs) and ATS, chronic absentee data, and parent outreach data  Grade Teams meet twice a month to review student data by grade team and assess success of improvement plans  Parent Coordinator manages Google Calendar where teachers document parent outreach and upcoming parent/teacher conferences. Data will be used to target parents who are difficult to contact and follow-up with teachers about their outreach  Parent Coordinator and Principal/Assistant Principals review parent attendance and survey data for workshops and events to evaluate impact of workshops Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the 2018-19 school year UASEM teams will continue to focus on teacher practice related to engagement and differentiation as indicated in Domain 3 to increase credit accumulation 2%. Strengths:  The instructional capacity of teachers is increased through the promotion of instructional strategies during analysis of student work samples leading to improved progress for groups of students. (Source SQR indicator 4.2)  100% of teachers participated in Instructional Inter-Visitations in classrooms relevant to their needs including many outside of the building  There was an 18% increase in teacher collaboration as evidenced by the 2017-18 School Quality Guide Needs: In the 2017-18 school year: Strategic and Deliberate Data Dives by teams into student performance to make instructional adjustments.   Content teams need to focus their work on rigorous and relevant task development.  While trends in teacher practice trended upward, of the approximate 300 times that Domain 3 was rated in observations, 41% were rated developing. (Teachboost Observation Data)  Ensure all teachers engage in ongoing checks for understandings so they may address student confusion in the moment (MoLP 2017-18) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the UASEM Instructional Cabinet will plan and facilitate professional development focused on student engagement as evidenced by a 2% increase in average credit accumulation, from 86% to 88%. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Teacher Teams All Students 9/4 - 6/26, PD Team will meet 4 times a month for PD, and 1 time a month with Administration Administration Instructional Cabinet  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Instructional Cabinet: UASEM created a Professional Development Team in 2017-18. The team consisted of administration and effective teachers across grades and content areas. The team was responsible for creating differentiated Professional Development in the form of Instructional Rounds with the focus on the school wide Problem of Practice using CEP goals as the measures of progress. The team will continue to use relevant data to adjust and implement weekly professional development based in the Instructional Rounds theory. The team will develop weekly professional development sessions that focus on identifying a problem of practice within the larger school goal of ‘Increasing all student engagement in rigorous and relevant tasks’. Teachers will use the researched based protocols for instructional rounds and adjust to live at the teacher to teacher level. The team will lead Departments weekly in task development and use assessment data to inform instruction. The focus will be using the assessment data to create rigorous and relevant tasks with the appropriate supports for all students to master the aligned learning target. Teacher Leadership Development: facilitators are department leads who are effective teachers. They will meet with administration over the summer to design the launch have PDs with administration on facilitating evidence based critical conversations using student achievement data. 4 The Instructional Team will run an instructional rounds using student work to determine impact with administration in the first weeks of school so that they have a model for leading their teams. The Instructional Team will meet with administration once per month to review relevant data and make adjustments throughout the year. Teachers will be provided with schedules that allow for common planning time 2 times a week every week to meet with co-teachers and teacher leaders to improve unit plan and lesson plan development, integrate instructional priorities and use data to make instructional decisions. ICT teams will have specific support geared towards smaximizing two teachers in the classroom. All teacher teams will revisit projected credit accumulation, attendance, and assessment data quarterly as part of the year-long inquiry cycle. ICT teams will have specific support geared towards maximizing two teachers in the classroom. Teachers Grade Team Leaders Department Leaders Attendance Team Teachers Students 9/4 - 6/26, Weekly Team Leaders Administration Quarterly Administration Teachers Quarterly Administration Team Leaders Special Education Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator and Grade Team Crew Leaders will be responsible for the invitation of parents to curriculum nights and student led conferences to monitor student progress and see what their child is learning 4 times a year. The Assistant Principal will implement and monitor the parent outreach and attendance for these events including the items below: 1. Parent Coordinator creates a calendar of events for critical outreach to parents based on the school calendar: Progress Reports, monthly attendance reports, parent-teacher conferences, student led-conferences, workshops, etc. 2. Career and Technical Education (CTE) Department, College Counselor and our Partnership Coordinator to develop Student-Led Conferences and Career Exploration 3. Parent Coordinator, Teacher Grade Team Members and Partnership Coordinator communicates the school-wide attendance policy. The Teacher Grade Team Members Implement targeted success mentoring strategies--from daily check-ins to regular parent/guardian communication--to positively influence the attendance rate. 5  4. Partnership Coordinator coordinates the “Student Welcome Committee” to run all open house events, accepted student night events, high school recruitment fairs, and act as the student attendance support network. Include design of special uniform and application process for students Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SBO for structured staff professional learning and student data/interventions   Common Planning time built into the schedule through common prep periods and/or SBO for other professional work time on Monday mornings  Trainings, bimonthly meetings, external professional development for Instructional Cabinet Leaders  5 hours of per session to train our School Intervention Team (SIT) comprised of special education teachers, general education teachers, administration and guidance counselor to support tier 2 and 3 interventions. Instructional cabinet comprised of four teachers   20 hours of classroom coverage funds to allow for teacher intervisitation both internally and at other schools with best practices  24 hours of per session to train new staff during the summer on UASEM instructional priorities  Extended school day grant to deliver academic interventions and student enrichment programming  40 hours of winter and spring break credit recovery programming Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, of 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th graders will have accumulated 88% of credits attempted in the fall term. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Measures Of Teacher Performance and credit accumulation data will be the measurements used. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  The principal has created a well-coordinated approach to building teacher leadership and empowering teachers to own their own educational growth. All teacher teams are led by experienced teachers who model strong facilitation skills and consistently support individual teachers within their teams. (MOLP 2016-17) School Principal is rated Effective in 2017-18, 2016-17, 2015-16, 2014-2015 and 2013-2014 school year performance (Source MOLP 2017, 2016, 2015, 2014, 2013)   Principal attends Instructional Rounds with 10 Urban Assembly Schools, Participates in district wide professional development planning sessions with superintendent, and is a member of the Urban Assembly Principal’s Advisory Group Needs:  Pedagogy: Work with teachers to develop a common understanding of rigor across all contents. Be sure that teachers consistently leverage strategies such as inquiry, collaborative learning, questioning, and multiple access points to promote student to student discussion and high levels of thinking. Look to expand the number of teacher videos that highlight best practices across the school and continue to support teachers with live coaching opportunities between for-stakes observations. (Source 2015 QR, 2016 MOLP)  Ensure all teachers engage in ongoing checks for understandings so they may address student confusion in the moment (MoLP 2017-18) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Instructional Cabinet will facilitate differentiated professional development aligned to school administrations frequent targeted feedback as evidenced by an increase in the average MOTP ratings for Danielson Framework for Teaching Domain 3, from 2.6 to 2.7. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Visit at least two other schools, with school leaders, within the Urban Assembly affinity group to share best practices and participate in shared problems of practice related to school leadership in the 2018-2019 school year through Urban Assembly Instructional Rounds, Affinity School visits, and teacher led and administrative supported inter-visitation instructional rounds model for our teachers. Observation and Supervision: Administration will conduct observations with actionable and timely feedback in a 3 week cycle. Teacher observations will be done specifically focusing on teachers’ highest leverage area of need aligned to their Instructional Round Focus. The feedback protocol will always include scholarship data specifically around predicted credit accumulation and mastery of content based on assessments. School Administration Attend at 2 instructional rounds per semester. Principals from at least 5 Urban Assembly schools Instructional Cabinet One Inter visitation per month for teachers Teachers Affinity Group Principals focused on Student Engagement All Teachers Develop and Lead Instructional Cabinet team with goals focused on alignment of curriculum and unit design, lesson study protocols focused on instructional strategies and assessment reviews including the review and analysis of student work. Instructional Cabinet Teachers Develop and Lead instructional cabinet specifically in UASEM’s instructional Priorities and coaching to support new/developing teachers with one on one coaching. 9/4 - 6/23, PD Team will meet 2 times a month for PD, and 1 time a month with Administration School Administration Instructional Cabinet Instructional Cabinet will develop weekly professional development sessions as well as differentiated workshops based on teacher areas of focus. The Cabinet will evaluate the impact of the professional learning opportunities on teacher practice and continually revise professional development to meet formative and summative CEP goals. All Teachers New Teachers 9/4 - 6/23, PD Team will meet 2 times a month for PD, and 1 time a month with Administration School Administration Instructional Cabinet 8  Instructional Cabinet will develop monthly department data team meetings that focus on reviewing assessment data to make instructional decisions as well as rigorous and relevant task design One on One strategic Coaching periods with Instructional Cabinet members and teachers Instructional Cabinet will develop monthly department data team meetings that focus on reviewing assessment data to make instructional decisions as well as rigorous and relevant task design One on One strategic Coaching periods with Instructional Cabinet members and teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Instructional Cabinet Teachers 9/4 - 6/23, PD Team will meet 2 times a month for PD, and 1 time a month with Administration School Administration Instructional Cabinet How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator will work with Administration, Grade Team Leaders, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, and Partnership Coordinator to target parent outreach and design specific workshops to inform parents of resources, supports, changes to curriculum, and Extended School Day options. These will happen monthly. In addition, leadership will invite parents to observe all monthly SLT meetings and create a forum for Q&A prior to meetings to address concerns and communicate next steps. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  5 hours a month of per session for planning time needed for instructional cabinets and department team leaders SBO for structured staff professional learning and student data/interventions   Common Planning time built into the schedule through common prep periods and/or SBO for other professional work time on Monday mornings  Trainings, bimonthly meetings, external professional development for Instructional Cabinet Leaders  5 hours of per session to train our School Intervention Team (SIT) comprised of special education teachers, general education teachers, administration and guidance counselor to support tier 2 and 3 interventions. Instructional cabinet comprised of four teachers   20 hours of classroom coverage funds to allow for teacher intervisitation both internally and at other schools with best practices  24 hours of per session to train new staff during the summer on UASEM instructional priorities 9   Extended school day grant to deliver academic interventions and student enrichment programming  40 hours of winter and spring break credit recovery programming  Differentiated professional development workshops that are aligned to administration's targeted feedback  TeachBoost Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the Instructional Cabinet will facilitate differentiated professional development aligned to school administrations frequent targeted feedback as evidenced by an increase in the average MOTP ratings for Danielson Framework for Teaching Domain 3, from 2.6 to 2.65. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Administration evaluates MOTP data. Teachers overall MOTP data shows progress in Domains 3, specifically in questioning and discussion, engaging students in learning Instructional Cabinet receives and evaluates global school MOTP data  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  According to the 2017-18 School Quality Guide, There is a 22% increase in Strong Community Ties. In fact 92%  of families say that the school consistently communicates with them (Source: 02M135 School Quality Snapshot). In the 2017-18 school year the school Guidance Counselor worked with the Parent Coordinator to hold parent workshops in the fall and spring, one on Financial Aid and one on The College Application process, respectively.  UASEM works with 45 different organizations to provide students with at least one WBL experience per semester focused on community service, internships, and civic responsibility. The school partnership coordinator has also cultivated over 48 internship opportunities from summer 2017 to summer 2018.  96% of parents/guardians of a child in grades 9-12 agreed or strongly agreed that their school helps keep their child on track for college, career, and success in life after high school; 97% of families say that they are satisfied with their child’s education this year. (Source: 02M135 2017-18 School Quality Guide) Needs:  Active parent engagement outside a small core group of parents and SLC attendance is low. There have been  several Parent Association meetings that have not met quorum . Stronger and more consistent outreach to parents around student attendance and opportunities for parents to visit and volunteer at the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will meaningful parent engagement regarding student college and career readiness as evidenced by 60 percent parent/guardian attendance at Student Led Conferences. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Student Led Conferences: twice per year students will prepare presentations around their college and career readiness as it aligns to the UASEM College and Career Passport. Conferences will be facilitated by student's "crew leader." Crew leader will schedule parents for twenty minutes blocks for the meeting. During conferences parents will have the opportunity to participate in other workshops and meet with social/emotional support staff as necessary. All students Parents & Families Sept 26, Nov 29-30, March 7-8, May 9 Administration Grade Teams Advisors Parent Coordinator Guidance Counselors Social Worker Grade Teams: each grade team divides the grade roster up into "crews" among teachers. Teacher "crews" leaders monitor their "crews" attendance throughout the year. Students with attendance between 60 and 89% receive more intensive interventions from their crew leaders through individualized plans, daily check-ins, phone calls and conferences with parents, and incentives for improved attendance. Crew leaders also facilitate biannual Student Led Conferences, which offer an opportunity to work with parents to see the impact attendance has on a student's academic performance. Crew leaders receive attendance support and training bimonthly during parent-outreach time where they can collaborate with the other grade teachers and work with the UASEM attendance team. Grade teams also plan community wide celebrations such as town halls and trips that recognize students who show improved and/or outstanding attendance. Grade 9 Advisory: 9th grade students will have a dedicated staff member who they meet with them in small groups (8 to 13 students) to help them in the transition to high school. These advisors will be in frequent communication with parents to ensure meaningful two way communication and maximize turn out at student led conferences where there will be important workshops on college and career readiness and attendance among others. Students 9/8 - 6/23, Grade Teams Parent/Families Bimonthly, once per semester for SLCs Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Ninth Grade Students 9/8 - 6/23; three times per week 9th Grade Advisors Parents & Families 2 The Parent Coordinator will use a range of tools (JupiterGrades, school messenger, REMIND, email, Friday Flash, social media) to reach out to parents and maximize participation. The parent coordinator will coordinate with Crew Leaders to contact parents who are hard to reach and offer translation services. The Parent Coordinator will maintain a spreadsheet to track Crew Leader scheduling, will monitor actual SLC attendance, and conduct follow-up for parents who schedule a conference but do not attend Parents Teachers 9/8 - 6/23 daily Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. School Messenger REMIND: Two way texting service Attendance Teacher to provide home visit and parent outreach support Groundswell – art organization who will provide opportunities for parents to come in and create a mural with students on the school walls. Workshops and In School Volunteering Activities facilitated by the school Parent Coordinator and Partnership Coordinator (i.e. Bronx Defenders “Know Your Rights” training; self-defense workshops with The Center for Anti-Violence Education) Parent Coordinator/Staff Calendar/Teacher Outreach Logs Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Training and support for CA4A facilitators  SBO for structures parent outreach and bimonthly grade team meetings regarding "crew" planning and progress  Parent coordinator to help coordinate multiple events and manage mass messaging systems  Crew meetings and planning outside of the school day  Use of DexPro data system  Equipment for a call center  Pitney-bow machine for mass mailing  Phone messenger   REMIND text system  MailChimp for Friday Flash  Guidance support outside of the school day  Creative connections for college and career workshops  Partnership Coordinator participation in industry commission meetings to promote career awareness and JupiterGrades for parent communication preparation  Time allocated in program for student advisory programming  Time allocated in the program at strategic points for "crews" to meet 3   $5000 in incentives for SLC turnout Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will meaningful parent engagement regarding student college and career readiness as evidenced by 60 percent parent/guardian attendance at the November Student Led Conferences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Official monthly attendance  Records of parent attendance at bi-monthly workshops  Parent Workshop Attendance  Parent RSVP Lists for SLCs  Advisory Outreach Lists  REMIND response rates  Parent Coordinator Activity Report (PCAR) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students are selected based on Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) performance, NYC ELA performance assessment baseline results, and interim assessment performance Students are selected based on DeltaMath (online assessment for basic foundational math skills) performance, and interim assessment performance Students are selected from weekly Juptiergrade reports, performance on interim assessment performance, and lab hour requirements for regents exams Students are selected from weekly Jupitergrade reports for tutoring sessions and teacher recommendations. Additionally, credit recovery students are selected based on Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ELA Intervention Small group During the school day Math Intervention Small group During the school day Science Enrichment Small group During the school day and after school Tutoring Small group Credit Recovery During the school day and after school 5  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) transcript reports pulled for STARS Students are selected based on Individualized Education Plan (IEP’s). Additionally, at-risk students are selected based on School Intervention Team (SIT) and grade team meeting recommendations. One-to-one and small group During the school day Individual and group counseling with guidance counselor and school social worker 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) The Urban Assembly School for Emergency Management (UASEM) currently has 6 students in temporary housing attending school. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Currently the school offers the following services for students in temporary housing: Uniform Purchases School Supply Purchase Free admission to all school events and trips School visits family shelters within respective borough to ensure that basic necessities (e.g. school material, transportation, etc.) and supplementary educational and counseling services are readily available to students and families. Supports schools by offering resources that can provide more comprehensive services to students in temporary housing and ensure that students receive the supports to which they are entitled. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In order to create a rigorous and sustainable process for identifying and selecting a teaching staff whose core values and instructional beliefs align to the educational philosophy the school, a new hiring process was developed. The process is comprised of a 5-phase process and conducted by a hiring committee of school leaders, teacher volunteers, Assistant Principal and the Principal For any given candidate the entire cycle would be completed in no more than 2 weeks; assuming the candidate started from resume phase and moved through the consensus phase. All resumes and steps along the process are tracked using a Google spreadsheet shared among the members of the hiring committee. The Google spreadsheet allows all members to comment on feedback, see each other’s' progress, and prevent the duplication of work. When possible committees of all stakeholders (parents, students, teachers, staff) are a part of the interviewing process. Additionally, teacher leaders are identified and trained in order to support a cohesive and collaborative environment. Teacher leader positions include instructional cabinet, special education coordinator, ELL coordinator, department leaders, grade team leaders, etc. Teachers are also encouraged to join outside learning communities and help develop and administer professional development. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 9  UASEM is focusing all professional development on 4 essential instructional elements for the 2019-2018 school year: 1. Aligned Learning Targets: Design aligned unit plans centered on rigorous and relevant tasks with appropriate texts to drive content. 2. Rigorous and Relevant Tasks: Rigorous and Relevant tasks that align to CCLS. 3. Literacy/Entry: Implement annotation strategies, dynamic word walls, and accountable talk in every classroom 4. Checks for Understanding: Design and implement course assessments including during the delivery of instruction. The Urban Assembly School for Emergency Management utilizes weekly Tuesday professional development to implement our instructional priorities. In addition, UASEM has effective teachers on staff that are designated as the instructional cabinet to help support, coach, and plan with all teachers. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day).  Teachers spend time reviewing all student IEP’s, ELL’s proficiencies and other relevant and available data on student performance from the previous year.  All teachers are required to incorporate modifications for students in unit plans and lesson plans without  diminishing rigor or expected levels of performance. Students are pulled out of class only during non-credit bearing courses such as advisory or during remediation/enrichment courses for additional support Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 0  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. School has an active MOSL committee to determine appropriate assessments and align school wide expectations. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) X X X X X Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 36,582 0 46267 5141 403,227 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. 1  Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Urban Assembly School for Emergency Management, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Urban Assembly School for Emergency Management will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 3  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 4  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 5  The Urban Assembly School for Emergency Management, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 6  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 7  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 8  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name UA School for Emergency Management Borough Manhattan School Number 135 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Rodolfo Elizondo Coach Taina Torres ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ian LeBlanc Teacher/Subject Area Diana Herrera/Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area Gary Cruz/Math Related-Service Provider Andrew Foley Superintendent Fred Walsh Assistant Principal Robert Magliaro Coach type here School Counselor Diana Denis Parent Diane Francis Parent Coordinator Lissette Aguirre Field Support Center Staff Member Alexandra Anormaliza Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 0  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 316 Total number of ELLs Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): 28 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.86% K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 3 2 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The Urban Assembly School for Emergency Management (02M135): Degrees of Reading: The DRP is a group-administered assessment designed to determine a student’s overall reading level for the purposes of selecting texts or identifying students who are substantially above or below grade level. It will be implemented three times per year to all students in order to track student reading levels over time, help students set goals to improve their reading, and evaluate the effectiveness of reading instruction and interventions. Skills assessed include knowledge of text structure and text genre, background knowledge about specific domains, differences between oral and silent reading comprehension, and student-reported comprehension strategies, as well as oral reading fluency and accuracy. Students with IEPs will also be tested annually as part of determining their present levels of performance and annual goals during the annual review process. Both assessments will assist teacher in appropriate modifications for text based 1  learning connected to their courses. According to our data 82% of our students are reading below grade level, of those 100% of our ELL's are reading below grade level. DRP data has recommended that our school incorporate more reading and explicit instruction on how to teach reading to our students across all courses. Regents Readiness Exams (RRE): Are administered twice a year. These assessments will inform teachers, students, and parents of Regents preparedness in relation to cumulative course skills and content. They will be developed to allow students multiple opportunities to demonstrate understanding and aligned to the percentage of content covered in the course. After each administration of the Regents Readiness Exams, teachers will meet their department head and principal to review the RRE results. Using a standard protocol for reviewing the data, teachers will work with their department head and principal to develop an action plan after each RRE and in 6-8 week cycles of reviewing student work in departments. In this plan teachers will outline a calendar of when and how specific skills will be spiraled into their coming lessons and/or reteach content altogether. Teachers and department heads will also identify students who will need additional after-school intervention and in school tutoring services. The information gathered from these assessments will be shared with students and parents along with next steps for improving performance, enabling students, parents, teachers, and administration to clearly work towards academic goals for each 6-8 cycle. Teachers will use this data to consistently adjust curriculum maps and modifications for our ELL students. Additionally, teachers will use performance assessment data to target specific skills in accordance with NYC ELA Performance Assessment rubric. Teachers will use data to explicitly infuse skills into their lessons. We will engage in lesson studies, generate common practices for how to teach the skills, and track progress using the same set of rubrics. Students scored between a 0 - 1.5 on the following 7 traits: Focus Position, Elaboration, Textual Analysis, Counter Claims, Reading, Organization, and Conventions. Teachers will use this data to identify high leverage skills that will be integrated into all courses for developing reading comprehension and writing. A direct impact will be visible in teacher's lesson plans, scope and sequences, assessments, and feedback to students. Additionally, common literacy, writing, and reading strategies have been implemented across content areas. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? SBO approved schedule allows for teachers to meet and plan 3 days a week prior to the start of the school day for planning, meetings with parents, making adjustments to their lessons, and look at student work to better support students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Success of program will be determined through growth on the three common assessments identified above. Specifically growth on the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP: reading assessment), Regents Readiness Exams (RRE: content assessment), and NYC ELA Performance Assessment (reading and writing assessment). Current practices at 02M135 measure progress of our ELL student population according to theNYSESLAT administration. Currently, all senior students have been rate proficient and 100% of all FELL students in the senior cohort have passed their ELA common core state exam 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? SBO approved schedule allows for teachers to meet and plan 3 days a week prior to the start of the school day for planning, meetings with parents, making adjustments to their lessons, and look at student work to better support students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Core of Instruction: All curriculum maps and lesson plans require teachers to design instruction with our ELL population in mind. Teachers are required to input appropriate modifications and considerations for students at key activities, transitions, and vocabulary when appropriate. Double Dose of Instruction: Beyond the core of instruction, our students have also been provided with an additional support periods twice to three times a week. The focus of this class is on language acquisition through the lens of the content areas students struggle and skill development and transcend all content areas. Intensive Intervention: One on one services are provided during and after class when students demonstrate limited success or progress. RtI Implementation and level of support are determined by our School Intervention Team (SIT). The team is comprised of 2  administrators, general education teacher, ELL coordinator, Special Education coordinator, and guidance counselor. Sample student work, referrals, and teacher anecdotes are reviewed by the SIT and they determine the content, support, mectrics and timeline for additional one-on-one support. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Current practices at 02M135 show progress among our ELL student population. Success of program will be determined through growth on the three common assessments identified above. Specifically growth on the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP: reading assessment), Regents Readiness Exams (RRE: content assessment), and NYC ELA Performance Assessment (reading and writing assessment). Current practices at 02M135 measure progress of our ELL student population according to theNYSESLAT administration. Currently, all senior students have been rate proficient and 100% of all FELL students in the senior cohort have passed their ELA common core state exam. Larger emphasis in all content areas will be placed on the reading and writing modalities. All three of our common assessments have indicated our ELL population to be struggling with these modalities. As a result classes will integrate common reading and writing strategies to support our ELL population. Students will be tracked on a 6 – 8 week basis to identify growth within each of the modalities, ELA traits, and mastery of content. Commonly used strategies include, but are not limited to, graphic organizers, reading strategies, common rubrics, visualizations, and language modifications. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? SBO approved schedule allows for teachers to meet and plan 3 days a week prior to the start of the school day for planning, meetings with parents, making adjustments to their lessons, and look at student work to better support students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our organizational model is push-in (co-teaching). Due to our new school status we do not currently have the capacity or staff for Programmatically our ELL students travel as a block. Students are not separated by proficiency level, but rather individualized attention and support is provided based on their proficiency level. The number of ESL periods per day a student is programmed for is dictated by the results of the NYSESLAT exam from the previous Spring. If a student is newly enrolled in NYC DOE and did not take the NYSESLAT exam the year before, they are programmed in a level based on the results of the NYSITELL exam. All students who score in the beginner proficiency level receive two periods of pull-out ESL instruction per day, 4 days a week, plus an additional pull-out period that meets twice a week. The 2 periods per day, 4 days a week is equivalent to 496 minutes per week, plus the 1 period a day twice a week is equivalent to 124 minutes per week five days a week, which totals 620 minutes per week. Students who score in the intermediate proficiency level are programmed for two periods of pull-out ESL instruction per day, 4 days 3  per week, which equals 248 minutes per day, plus an additional pull-out period that meets twice a week for a total of 372 minutes per week. Students who score in the advanced proficiency level are programmed for two periods of pull-out ESL instruction per day, 4 days per week, which equals 248 minutes per day a pull-out period that meets twice a week for a total of 124 minutes per week and 248 minutes of ELA per week. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The number of ESL periods per day a student is programmed for is dictated by the results of the NYSESLAT exam from the previous Spring. If a student is newly enrolled in NYC DOE and did not take the NYSESLAT exam the year before, they are programmed in a level based on the results of the NYSITELL exam. All students who score in the beginner proficiency level receive two periods of pull-out ESL instruction per day, 4 days a week, plus an additional pull-out period that meets twice a week. The 2 periods per day, 4 days a week is equivalent to 496 minutes per week, plus the 1 period a day twice a week is equivalent to 124 minutes per week five days a week, which totals 620 minutes per week. Students who score in the intermediate proficiency level are programmed for two periods of pull-out ESL instruction per day, 4 days per week, which equals 248 minutes per day, plus an additional pull-out period that meets twice a week for a total of 372 minutes per week. Students who score in the advanced proficiency level are programmed for two periods of pull-out ESL instruction per day, 4 days per week, which equals 248 minutes per day a pull-out period that meets twice a week for a total of 124 minutes per week and 248 minutes of ELA per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ELL Coordinator plans with our English Department, Science Department, and Social Studies Department twice a week. At these meetings, the teachers collaborate to ensure consistency and share best practices. The co-planning time is crucial to ensure that the ELL students are receiving the same level of instruction as their native English speaking peers with additional supports in their native language. Language Arts is taught using ESL and ELA instructional strategies. Specific area content and skill sets needed from other subject areas is supported by activities done within the ESL class and by helping ELL students to focus on trouble spots during enrichment and support periods. These areas are identified by the classroom teacher and relayed to the ESL teacher during teacher team meetings. Additionally, the ELL students are taught test-taking skills, studying skills, reading for meaning and reading strategies, test question vocabulary, listening for details and pacing, graphic organizers for writing, reading strategies such as chunking, stop and summarize, teacher created glossary using language dictionaries, use of video and images for dense or difficult content, use of listening stations, and translations tools. Based on the discussions at the grade level teams, the teachers collaborate and share units they will be starting. The ESL teacher then uses reading about those topics in his ESL classes to teach various reading strategies. It is for this purpose that the team meeting time is so valuable 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students will be given assessments in their preferred language. For smaller assessments, formative assessment and classroom tasks, translation services are provided when applicable. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? a. SIFE 4  b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status All students receive services and modifications described above. SIFE students and newcomers are provided additional one-on-one support during push-in services in addition to all other services described earlier. Students in the range of 4 – 6+ and former ELLs are specifically struggling with reading and writing modalities; hence, their services and enrichment/remediation services center on providing strategies to practice these skills and apply across all content areas. Testing accommodations are provided for ELL students and ELL students with IEPs, in addition to provided accommodations for FELLs two years after they demonstrate proficiency. Our ELL Coordinator makes use of QTEL training that is specially geared towards assisting ELL students in mastering skills requisite to the ELA Regents examinations. For our ELLs receiving service 4-6 years the focus is on reading strategies, such as, text marking, summarizing, skimming and scanning, making text to text and text to self connections. In addition, there will be more emphasis on vocabulary development. For ELLs with 6+ years, various interventions are used in the areas of reading and writing. In reading they work on summarizing techniques, reading comprehensions strategies and vocabulary development. In writing they focus on paragraphing, use of transition words and staying on topic. They also work on tasks to ensure that they are successful in their Regents exams. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL students are taught test-taking skills, studying skills, reading for meaning and reading strategies, test question vocabulary, listening for details and pacing, graphic organizers for writing, reading strategies such as "chunking", stop and summarize, teacher created glossary using language dictionaries, use of video and images for dense or difficult content, use of listening stations, andtranslations tools. Based on the discussions at the grade level teams, the teachers collaborate and share units they will be starting. The ESL teacher then uses reading about those topics in his ESL classes to teach various reading strategies. It is for this purpose that the team meeting time is so valuable. Technology includes ipads with translations apps, digital translators with English to preferred language translation support, English to Spanish dictionaries, and laptops that are enabled with Google apps in order to provide additional videos, readings, lessons, etc. that support language acquisition. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All teachers are provided with at least 2 period per week of common planning time to meet with their co-teacheer and/or departments including ELL coordiantor and special education teachers to review unit plans, conduct lesson studies, and review student work with emphasis on making appropriate modifications to support ELLs and SWDs. Additionally an SBO allows for teacher to meet an additional 3 days prior to the start of the school day every week for 55 minutes each day. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELA: Students receive activities, task, visuals, technological support, and other modifications to ensure equal access to all content. Each lesson requires specific mention of modifications. Planning for ELA happens in conjunction with an ELA/ELL expert, special education teacher, and our ELL coordinator. Additionally, our ELL students are supported by two teachers in their ELA class. Global: Students receive activities, task, visuals, technological support, and other modifications to ensure equal access to all content. Each lesson requires specific mention of modifications. Planning for Global History happens in conjunction with a Global History content teacher, and our ELL coordinator. Additionally, our ELL students are supported by two teachers in their Global History class. Science: Students receive activities, task, visuals, technological support, and other modifications to ensure equal access to all content. Each lesson requires specific mention of modifications. Planning for Science happens in conjunction with a Living Environment content teacher, and our ELL coordinator. Additionally, our ELL students are supported by two teachers in their 5  Science class. Math: Students receive activities, task, visuals, technological support, and other modifications to ensure equal access to all content. Each lesson requires specific mention of modifications. Planning for Math happens in conjunction with an Math content teacher, and special education teacher. Additionally, our ELL students are supported by two teachers in their Math class. Our ELL students receive an additional 126 minutes a week of support via an enrichment class. Students work with our ELL Coordinator to develop reading, writing, speaking and listening skills. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The school is considering educational software achieve 3000 to support literacy development for our ELL students and to more frequently collect information on their progress. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. UASEM has a full time staff member, our partnership coordinator, dedicated to securing enrichment opportunities for all students. Our goal is to ensure all students participate in extracurricular activities in and out of the school. Students’ complete surveys and intake interviews to ensure appropriate interest and fit. Students are continually exposed to new opportunities on a weekly basis and for programs requiring an application process students meet individually or in small groups with our partnership coordinator for support. Extracurricular programs are are divided into 5 categories at UASEM: 1) Sports, 2) Arts and Theater, 3) Technology, 4) Teacher-Led Clubs, 5) Other. Programs are recommended to individual students through out partnership coordinator, Elizabeth Oliver, and advertised in multiple language representative of our school community. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Technology and materials used to support our ELL population include: iPads with translation capabilities, listening stations, Laptops to support literacy software such as achieve 3000 and currently used Google Drive to share glossary and support material in real time, Multi-language dictionaries, word walls in English and Spanish, and common literacy graphic organizers to assist students in breaking down difficult texts. Technology includes ipads with translations apps, digitial translators with English to preferred language translation support, English to Spanish dictionaries, and laptops that are enabled with Google apps in order to provide additional videos, readings, lessons, etc. that support language acquisition. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is provided to our students through the use of peer translators in the classes as well as access to digital translators via iPads, listening stations for presentations in their native language, and, if necessary, assessments in their native language. The native language is used to assist vocabulary development. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All services described above correspond to supporting our students' development in their reading and writing modalities. Our school provides students and their families with individual meeting opportunities with ELL coordinator, for academic support and goal settings, Parent coordinator for home support and additional services outside of the school, partnership coordinator for enrichment and extra-curricular opportunities. Interest surveys are also conducted by each member of the school community to ensure equal access for all ELL students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Technology and materials used to support our ELL population include: iPads with translation capabilities, listening stations, Laptops to support literacy software such as achieve 3000 and currently used Google Drive to share glossary and support material in real time, Multilanguage dictionaries, word walls in English and Spanish, and common literacy graphic organizers to 6  assist students in breaking down difficult texts. Technology includes ipads with translations apps, digitial translators with English to preferred language translation support, English to spanish dictionaries, and laptops that are enabled with google apps in order to provide additional videos, readings, lessons, etc. that support language acquisition. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students entering our school are assigned an advisor. If possible, the advisor is semi-fluent/fluent in the student’s native language. The advisory group meets 4 days a week using a structure called “Circles of Power and Respect CPR)”. The purpose of the advisory circles is to acculturate students to the UASEM environment, develop a strong bond between the other 12 students in the advisory, and to connect the students to a teacher advocate. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our ELL Coordinator, guidance counselor, special education coordinator and administration attends most professional development sessions offered by the New York City Department of Education as well as those offered by our Affinity Group. Workshops include Data Analysis and Instructional Planning, Insights into the Journey of Unaccompanied Migrants, and Academic Language Development Across Content Areas. We also take advantage of professional development opportunities offered by Office of ELL’s. Some of the professional development sessions that our ELL Coordinator has attended building academic vocabulary, scaffolding and assessment. During staff development sessions, we often focus on best practices with ESL students so they can be implemented into content area classes. During each Chancellor's Professional Development Day, time is set aside to develop the entire staff's ELL knowledge with a focus on how to provide content area support to ELL students. In addition, during several monthly faculty conferences throughout the year time is allocated to staff ELL concerns as well as on approaches that will benefit our ESL population. UASEM has a professional development period built into our teacher’s schedules. Teachers meet once a week to ensure our instructional priorities are met and developed. Below is a breakdown of our professional development by Semester, including the Literacy pieces that directly corresponds to our ELL population. The school has an established Monday professional development day where teachers review assessments, student work, and lesson plan with a focus on our ELL and SwD population. Student progress is tracked and appropriate modifications to planning and support are made. Teachers plan with ELL and special education coordinators to incorporate multiple entry points, and UDL best practices, and turn key information gathered from their respective professional development sessions outside of the school building in order to support teachers in planning process. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 7  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Students entering our school are assigned an advisor. If possible, the advisor is semi-fluent/fluent in the student’s native language. The advisory group meets 4 days a week using a structure called “Circles of Power and Respect CPR)”. The purpose of the advisory circles is to acculturate students to the UASEM environment, develop a strong bond between the other 12 students in the advisory, and to connect the students to a teacher advocate. For our guidance counselor, The Office of ELLs (OELL) provides professional development opportunities for working with English Language Learners. ELL Coordinator and administration attends most professional development sessions offered by the New York City Department of Education as well as those offered by our Affinity Group. We also take advantage of professional development opportunities offered by Office of ELL’s. Some of the professional development sessions that our ELL Coordinator has attended building academic vocabulary, scaffolding and assessment. During staff development sessions, we often focus on best practices with ESL students so they can be implemented into content area classes. During each Chancellor's Professional development Day, time is set aside to develop the entire staff's ELL knowledge with a focus on how to provide content area support to ELL students. In addition, during several monthly faculty conferences throughout the year time is allocated to staff ELL concerns as well as on approaches that will benefit our ESL population. UASEM has a professional development period built into our teacher’s schedules. Teachers meet once a week to ensure our instructional priorities are met and developed. Below is a breakdown of our professional development by Semester, including the Literacy pieces that directly corresponds to our ELL population. Agenda and next steps are kept on school's online google drive folder. Physical records are maintained in office B30. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Meetings are scheduled with ELL coordinator, advisor, and student. Students prepare a binder of exemplary and struggling work to present to parents. ELL coordinator reviews student progress as it relates to language acquisition and progress towards scoring a level of Commanding. The advisor helps facilitate student presentation of work to the parent. ELL coordinator and Parent coordinator provide translation services if needed. Parent phone calls and mailings are made home by our parent coordinator , Lissette Aguirre. Guidance counselor, Diana Thervil provides home language survey results to the parent coordinator in order to ensure parents are provided with appropriate documentation in the appropriate language. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents of students who are enrolled are invited to attend monthly Parent Association meetings. These meetings are facilitated by the PA President and all parents/guardians are invited and encouraged to attend. Notification of the meetings is sent out via phone messenger in the home language of the family as well as via monthly mailings. In addition to discussing issues related specifically to our school such as, dress code, uniform policy, grading policy, etc, the parents brainstorm additional parent meeting topics. Jupiter Grades, the online grade book we use. Additionally, there have been workshops on keeping track of their child’s progress. Translators are made available for all such events. Parent phone calls and mailings are made home by our parent coordinator , Lissette Aguirre. Guidance counselor, Heather Binen provides home language survey results to the parent coordinator in order to ensure parents are provided with appropriate documentation in the appropriate language. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 8  9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Rodolfo Elizondo, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: UA School for Emergency Mngt School DBN: 02M135 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Rodolfo Elizondo Title Principal Robert Magliaro Assistant Principal Lissette Aguirre Parent Coordinator Andrew Foley ENL/Bilingual Teacher Diane Francis Parent Diana Herrera Teacher/Subject Area Gary Cruz Taina Torres Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Heather Binen School Counselor Fred Walsh Alexandra Anormaliza Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 1/1/01 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M135 School Name: UA School for Emergency Management Superintendent: Fred Walsh The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Garcia Joshua Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Letter is sent home requesting parent to fill out home language survey. Parent fills out home language survey, assistance from a pedagogue is provided if necessary. Parents are provided with the ELL Coordinator and Parent Coordinator contact information to assist in explaining any initial documents to be completed. If further assistance is required then parents are directed to our ELL coordinator, Parent Coordinator, or Guidance Counselor for additional information on translation services. Initial translation services are provided to all parents based on historical data we have from our home language survey results from previous years. 2  Parents are invited to the school before the start of the school year at our annual Accepted Students Night to collect initial translation and language preferences. Student emergency blue cards are filled out at this event, for parents who are not able to attend, an appointment is scheduled for them to meet critical members of our school community over the summer or a home visit is scheduled to gather initial information. ATS Report indicating home language along with surveys conducted by ELL coordinator, Special Education coordinator, Parent coordinator, and Partnership coordinator are aggregated to determine the method and form of communication as well as preferred home language. Parent coordinator maintains Emergency Blue Card information and updates information onto our online grade book system to quickly share preferred home language and method of communication with the entire school staff. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Bengali Chinese English French Mandarin Mandinka Spanish Polish Urdu 1 3 4 263 3 0 2 115 2 2 0.25 0.76 1.01 66.58 0.76 0 0.51 29.11 0.51 0.51 1 3 2 264 2 2 2 115 2 2 0.25 0.76 1.01 66.58 0.76 0 0.51 29.11 0.51 0.51 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English, Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 3  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families Weekly through UASEM newletter and as needed for other important communication Provide information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand. Provide documents that involve parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs and Parent Involvement Policies. Monthly during PA/SLT meetings Provide parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information including but not limited to: Reading Assessments, Writing Assessments, Progress Reports, and Regents Predictive Assessments. Once per quarter plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Coordinator DOE Translation Services Translation tools in JupiterGrades, Remind, and school messenger Google Translate when necessary Parent Coordinator DOE Translation Services Translation tools in JupiterGrades, Remind, and school messenger Google Translate when necessary Parent Coordinator DOE Translation Services Translation tools in 4  Provide weekly newsletters to parents to update parents on school functions, special events, student shout-outs, volunteering and educational opportunities, and field trips. When appropriate and available, notices that are created by DOE are pulled from the intranet at http://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/translation_and_interpretation_unit. Weekly JupiterGrades, Remind, and school messenger Google Translate when necessary Parent Coordinator DOE Translation Services Translation tools in JupiterGrades, Remind, and school messenger Google Translate when necessary 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Workshops Ongoing - 3 per semester. Workshops are scheduled for parents based on needs identified during Parent Association meetings. Meetings range from Attendance and Lateness Intervention to Emergency Preparedness. Parent Association Meetings Parent Association and School Leadership Team meetings are held once a month on the third Wednesday of every month. Three times per semester Once per month minimum provide interpretation service(s)? Parent Coordinator works with necessary teachers and staff If the Parent Coordinator cannot assist he will connect staff to DOE translation services and other translation tools (JupiterGrades, REMIND, School Messenger, Google Translate) Parent Coordinator works with necessary teachers and staff If the Parent Coordinator cannot assist he will connect staff to DOE translation services and other translation tools (JupiterGrades, 5  Parent Meetings Parent meetings are schedule with advisors, content teachers, guidance counselors, and schoo administration to discuss concerns, trends, and/or develop action plans for individual students on a regular basis. IEP/Annual Growth Meetings Annual meetings are scheduled with parents to discuss Individualized Education Plan goals, progress, services, and potential amendments to IEPs. Annual meetings are also scheduled for English Language Learners to discuss their progress, services, and goals. Student-Led Conferences/Parent Teacher Conferences Four student-led conferences are held during the school year as an alternative to the traditional parent-teacher conferences in November and March . An additional Parent-Teacher conference is held in May . Special Events/Open School Nights Family night is held in September along with ongoing volunteering and field trip opportunities and annual traditions. REMIND, School Messenger, Google Translate) Parent Coordinator works with necessary teachers and staff If the Parent Coordinator cannot assist he will connect staff to DOE translation services and other translation tools (JupiterGrades, REMIND, School Messenger, Google Translate) Parent Coordinator works with necessary teachers and staff If the Parent Coordinator cannot assist he will connect staff to DOE translation services and other translation tools (JupiterGrades, REMIND, School Messenger, Google Translate) Once per year, plus additional meetings for progress monitoring Once per semester 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our parent coordinator speaks Spanish, which covers the majority of our students. We have identified other staff in the building to communicate in a majority of the other languages spoken at the school. Translation tools in school messenger, Google translate and the office of translation services will be used when a campus staff members is not available for a specific language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 6  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The school has allocated 50 minutes for both professional develop and parent outreach. During this time the LAC will train staff on the different resources to reach families who speak the covered languages. The LAC will also be the point person who will provide ongoing support and reminders to staff around the goal /compliance of this regulation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parent coordinator is responsible for providing each parent with an understanding of the language assistance services and a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities at Parent Association meetings and through mailing. Additionally, in our parent handbook and posted in main office are the different language offerings for various school documents. Home language survey is reviewed by all office staff to ensure appropriate perferred home language identification for families of our students. When appropriate and available, notices that are created by DOE are pulled from the intranet at http://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/translation_and_interpretation_unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys are conducted quarterly by our parent coordinator to determined the effectiveness along with the annual learning environment survey. Surveys are scheduled in tandem with our school's student led conferences to ensure a representative cross section of all families who are part of our school community. 7 
