2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 05M154 School Name: P.S. 154 HARRIET TUBMAN Principal: ELIZABETH JARRETT 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Harriet Tubman Learning Center 310500010154 3K to 5 School Number (DBN): 05M154 250 West 127 th Street, New York, 10027 212-864-2400 212-864-3933 Phone Number: Elizabeth Jarrett Fax: ejarret@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 05 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Elizabeth Jarrett Beverly Dais CenitaThigpen Cheryl Moss IeshiaGilcrest N/A Catherine Hogg District Information DanikaRux Superintendent: 123 Morningside Drive, Unit 2Room 235, New York, NY 10027 Drux@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-222-1395 Phone Number: 212-316-0451 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue 8 th Floor New York, New York 10001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Elizabeth Jarrett Beverly Dais CenitaThigpen June Nelson IeshaGilcrest N/A N/A Catherine Hogg Cheryl Moss Priscilla Ciscart *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/ UFT 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jasmine Perez Angelica Gonzalez JonmeshaEllies Ali Porter Margaret DiakiteBruce Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? C.S. 154's mission is to provide a safe, child-centered environment, focused on educating all students to become literate, critical thinkers and independent learners through excellence in teaching and learning. With strong commitment to academic excellence, we will ensure that our students will be college and career ready as they engage in challenging tasks. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. CS 154 is a 3K to 5 elementary school located in Central Harlem at 127th Street between Adam Clayton Powell Boulevard and Frederick Douglass Boulevard. Our community school is collaborative, and we are always in search of resources to provide our students with varied learning experiences to enrich their lives and support our school's theory of action, which involves expanded learning opportunities, physical and mental health supports, family engagement, and early childhood development, all paired with high quality instruction. We were awarded a three-year N.Y.C.D.O.E. Attendance Improvement and Drop Out Prevention (A.I.D.P.) grant, that has been renewed for 2018-19. Our partner under A.I.D.P. to support this work is Teachers College, Columbia University Raising Educational Achievement Coalition of Harlem (REACH). To further support our work around the community schools model, we have partnered with many Community Based Organizations (C.B.O.s) including:  American Ballet Theater  Apollo Theater Oral History Program  Asphalt Green  Association to Benefit Children  Behind the Book  Columbia University School of Engineering  Earth Friends  Harlem Children's Zone  Harlem Grown  New York Chess Kids  New York Public Library Smile Dental Programs   Target Corporation (for support of family reading nights)  Teachers College, Columbia University (lead agency under A.I.D.P. grant)  Urban Yoga Our expanded learning opportunities (E.LO.) include a variety of activities for students including chess, yoga, swimming, science, music and art programs. We partnered with Achievers Enrichment for a tutoring and Saturday Academy program. In our Summer in the City 2018 program, we will be partnering with Behind the Book and Young Audiences of NY (YANY) to provide enrichment activities. We also push expanded learning opportunities into the school day such as a partnerships with the Apollo Theater Oral History Program, Behind the Book, and Coding. For 2018-19, we plan to expand our E.LO. programs to include a pre-k after school program to support families' needs. We will also be taking part in the Readorium and Exploring Reading pilot programs in the district next year that will be additional Expanded Learning Opportunity (E.L.O) options for students who are struggling readers. For physical and mental health opportunities, each year our school organizes a Health Fair for families and students. Last year we organized dental and vision screenings with follow-up services for students, and will continue again this year. We partner with Harlem Grown, which teaches students about urban gardening and healthy eating habits. Our Zumba class will continue school-wide with students, staff and families this year. We are expanding our partnership with Success Highways to strengthen mental health supports from our guidance team and social workers. Based on 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  the work we have done as a school community, our school was the recipient of the School Wellness Platinum Award for five consecutive school years (2013-14 through 2017-18). We will continue to educate our students and families about healthy eating options and movement activities to promote a healthy lifestyle. Families participate regularly at a variety of events at our school and have expressed their gratitude for the wide-range of learning experiences and opportunities offered to their children. We had 100% of parents (257) respond to the 2017-18 School Survey. The results indicated that 97% of our parents were satisfied with the education their child received this year. Also, 97% of the parents felt that our school offered a variety of courses, extracurricular activities, and services to keep their child interested in schools. In surveys and at our Community School Forum, parents expressed an interest in more academic-based workshops to help them reinforce math and reading skills at home, and next year we will expand the number of workshops around these topics. REACH works with our staff providing professional development, and last year helped support them to expand their repertoire of literacy strategies, and develop teacher leadership capacity to ensure that rigorous instruction takes place in the classroom. Additionally, a DOE Teacher Effectiveness Coach provides support to our teachers to develop their ability to understand the instructional expectations and coherent implementations of strategies. The school also employs its own Literacy Coach and Math Coach. In 2015-16, we expanded our partnership with Teachers College to provide additional support for implementation of the TC Reading & Writing Project curriculum. We also began a PD series through Corwin around High Expectations Teaching that will continue into 2018-19. We will continue these supports in 2018-19 and work with Teaching Matters next year to provide added math and literacy coaching for our K-2 teachers. We were also selected to participate in the New Teacher Center i-3 Scale-up Teacher Induction Program. Through this initiative, a school-based mentor will be trained to support the growth and development of early career teachers, primarily with 1-3 years of experience. To prepare our students with 21st century technology skills and engage the diverse learning styles of our students, our school promotes integration of technology in instruction. Each classroom is equipped with Smart Board capabilities and at least three or more computers available for student use. Mobile laptop stations are moved from classroom to classroom to make technology more accessible to students. Carmel Hill Funds sponsors the Accelerated Reading and Accelerated Math online common core aligned assessments which help students to keep track of their academic progress in reading and mathematics. In 2018-19, we also hope to hire a technology intern (C.U.N.Y) to support our technology teacher by completing minor repairs and enhance the school's webpage. Our average student attendance rate for the 2017-18 school year was 93% and we have set an attendance goal of 97% which is aligned with the city's goal for 2018-19. In order to achieve this, we launched a year-long attendance initiative which involved support for parents, students, and faculty, such as workshops, parent focus groups, Kinvolved, (an attendance app), and daily/weekly attendance shout-outs via the school intercom. This will continue in 2018-19. We will use our Student Success Team (which includes the attendance team) to devise an action plan and other strategies to work closely with our chronically absent students and their families. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. There are approximately 290 students currently enrolled in our school. Our school population is ethnically diverse, with students from several backgrounds enrolled. In 2017-18, the population consisted of 58% African American, 30% Hispanic, 4% Pacific Islander, 3% White, and 3% Asian, and 1% American Indian. The student body included 19% English Language Learners (E.L.L.s) (an increase from 15% in 2016-17). Nearly one-third of our student body was comprised of students with IEPs, which is an increase from 20% in 2016-17. Our ELL population consists of 5 students at entering level, 14 students at emerging level, 15 students at transitioning level, 14 students at expanding level, and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  6 students at commanding level. About 45% of our SWD population is served in self-contained classes, while 20% receive services in ICT classes. There are 2 ICT classes, 3 self-contained classes, and a small number of students receive SETSS. Our SWD students identify as having speech and language impairments, learning disabilities, and emotional disabilities. Ninety-seven percent of the students are eligible for free or reduced-priced lunch. We have a small transient population who currently reside in temporary housing, approximately 20%. Our current enrollment is 290 students reflecting a loss of approximately ten students since last school year. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In 2017-18, our school continued to make gains by strengthening family and community ties and developing trust. On the School Quality Guide, our scores for family and community ties increased from 2.76 in 2017 to 4.41 in 2018. On indicators around Trust, scores increased from 3.38 to 4.04. Through the award of the A.I.D.P. grant and our partnership with REACH, we have expanded the variety of programs for parents that includes referrals for mental and physical health, T.A.S.C./G.E.D. classes, and school-wide celebrations. We have increased our ability to communicate with parents about student attendance through the use of Kinvolved. Our wide variety of health programs (both physical and mental) have helped to create a supportive environment for our students so that they can maximize their learning. Our School Quality Guide scores indicate we have shown less growth in the areas of Rigorous Instruction (3.61) and Collaborative Teachers (3.45). We recognize that our student outcomes need improvement, and are hopeful that a focus on Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teachers will translate into improved outcomes. In 2018-19, we plan to focus on the element of rigorous instruction by continuing to expand attention to our curriculum and increasing supports for teachers around rigorous engagement. Results of our 2017-18 interim assessments indicate students continue to struggle with writing to indicate reading comprehension and will be the continued focus of our literacy coach. In math, we will continue to emphasize pedagogical content knowledge starting with a Summer Institute for teachers in grades 3 - 5. Under the element of Collaborative Teachers, we will develop the capacity of teacher teams to use data and formative assessments to ensure teachers are monitoring student progress and targeting students for remediation so that there is improvement. We will continue to use the Datawise Improvement Process Cycle to improve teaching and learning, which involves: organizing for collaborative work, building assessment literacy, creating a data overview, digging into data, examining instruction, developing an action plan, planning to assess progress, and acting and assessing. Under the element for Effective School Leadership, we will also attempt to strengthen support for teachers by providing more consistent, timely, and actionable feedback following observations and artifact reviews. We hope that these efforts, when combined with our attention to the other elements of our community school model, will translate into stronger student outcomes in the upcoming year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 05M154 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 302 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 8 7 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 24 1 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 98.0% % Attendance Rate 95.4% % Reduced Lunch 17.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.7% 31.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 22.1 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 17.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 47% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) No N/A 1 1 1 92.0% 2.3% 31.1% 55.6% 7.3% 2.6% 2 0% 5.9 13.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Black, Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the school’s data sources, Principal's Practice Observation (.PP.O.) findings around Rigorous Instruction, an area of celebration is the school's use of data including running records, AR Reading and Math, interim assessments, Teachers College Reading and Writing Project (T.C.R.W.P.) and teacher-created assessments. Our data coach has helped us to make improvements in how we organize our data and provide reports using the Apperson scanner in order to provide data to teachers in a timely manner to modify instruction as needed. Additionally, over the past several years we have adopted more rigorous curricula including Teachers College Readers and Writers Project (TCRWP) and Envisions math. One of area of focus that was identified includes the need to redesign curricular maps to emphasize higher order skills and rigorous habits across all grade levels and strengthen teacher pedagogical knowledge across grades. A review of our Advance data for 2017-18. indicates that 11% of teachers were rated developing while the balance were effective. However, for the indicator of Designing Coherent Instruction (1E) only 65% of teachers were effective. There is inconsistent implementation of the TCRWP and Envisions curricula across teachers and writing instruction lacks rigor and consistency. Another area for growth in the spring 2018 P.P.O. is the need to connect student engagement to questioning and discussion practices. On Engaging Students in Learning (3C), 53% of teachers were developing. Teachers struggle to engage diverse learners using multiple entry points. Despite our progress in organizing data school-wide, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  teachers are still not using assessment on a regular formative basis in their classrooms as evidenced by scores in Using Assessment in Instruction (3D), where 65% are developing. The impact of these outcomes are reflected in the 2017-18 New York State Education Department (N.Y.SE.D) English Language Arts (.E.L.A.) and math assessment scores for our students. In E.L.A. we saw declines across all grades. In math we also saw declines across all grades. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will see a 10% gain (16 additional students) in students scoring at proficiency (levels 3 & 4) in grades 3-5 on the N.Y.S.E.D. Math exams when comparing to the 2018 N.Y.S.E.D. outcomes as a result of the adaptations made to the curriculum to include rigorous habits and higher order thinking skills in all academic tasks, across all grades and subjects, focusing on access and scaffolds to support varied learners. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Establish a calendar and schedule for the administration of periodic assessments in reading, math and writing to reading that includes the routine use of protocols to analyze data and respond to data trends in lessons and units. All teachers; vertical teams Summer 2018, updated ongoing through May 2019 Data consultants; math coach; administrative team; lead teachers; IC (Instructional Cabinet) Vertical teams (K-2, 3-5) Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Selected teachers; Math Coach; TC REACH; administrative team; external PD providers Reform the instructional cabinet to include principal, AP and coaches as an opportunity to review trends in instruction, plan PD, and determine how well teachers are responding to needs of students. Establish a PD schedule for teachers to improve fidelity of implementation of the Envisions math curricula. This will include sessions that address mathematical pedagogical content knowledge and strategies through increased on-site coaching on the use of manipulatives in math, scaffolding tasks, and the use of math talks to increase discussion. Implement a blended learning instructional model aligned to the Envisions curriculum in grades 3-5 for mathematics instruction that will focus on differentiation through small group instruction. We will focus on the use of technology for additional supports for SWDs and ELLs so that they can receive additional reinforcement and work at their own pace in small groups. Establish a PD schedule that includes inter-visitations for teachers to observe and provide feedback to colleagues around mathematical practices specifically looking for best practices for ELLs and SWDs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Calendar and monitor implementation of high expectations PD to be delivered by Corwin that will support the implementation of the math curricula for all learners. Implement district-initiatives (including staff training) around Algebra for All and Computer Science for All. Administer a minimum of two interim assessments in Mathematics to assess students mastery of math skills/priority standards that have been taught to determine mastery and students' needs Implementation of the Datawise Improvement Process Cycle (organizing for collaborative work, building literacy assessment, creating a data overview, examining instruction) will include focus on the three key subgroups: E.L.Ls., S.W.D.s, and Economically Disadvantaged students. Implement a Saturday Test academic enrichment program for students in grades 2-5 for three hours daily, focusing on test preparation.strategies. The Saturday program will begin December 2018 through May 2019 for approximately three hours each week. We will focus on ways in which teachers can work with Saturday academy instructors to share ongoing assessment outcomes so that students can be grouped appropriately and instruction can be adjusted. Implement Black Fem financial literacy program to improve math skills in an effort to engage SWDs, ELLs, and lowest third students in everyday math. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Classroom Teachers, Students Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Coaches; Administrative team; Lead teachers; TC REACH Gr. 3-5 Students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Black Fem How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and families will be invited to workshops throughout the 2018-19 school year that will focus on a variety of Next Generation skills and other instructional topics so that parents will be able to continue learning at home. Each month, a different grade or cluster of grades (K-2, 3-5) will have a workshop based on a specific topic. The instructional coaches, with support from TC REACH will plan and facilitate the workshops, and the Parent Coordinator, the Community School Director and other Community Partners will implement the workshops and recruit families to attend. We will invite parents to celebrate student success with the Black Fem financial literacy program. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Human resources: Teachers selected for REACH, teachers selected for all additional PD; Instructional Coaches; Asst. Principal; Principal; TC Instructional. Specialist; other consultants; Parent Coordinator, Community School Director; Corwin PD providers; Black Fem facilitators Instructional or Material Resources: Curriculum guides; templates; other books or resources to support expansion of teacher strategies; lesson plans, unit plans Structural supports: Coverage for teachers who will attend external professional development; consistent PD time for teachers to plan and implement strategies; meeting space for PD Fiscal: Per session salary for teachers; coverage for teacher(s) who will conduct parent workshops; fiscal support for additional consultants as needed Funds will be used to pay registration fees for teachers attending educational conferences and workshops.     Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will anticipate gains of 5% across grades 3-5 on the Interim assessments in both ELA and Math, to monitor our progress towards meeting our target goal. We will compare the scores on the REACH interim assessments issued in November to the scores in February 2019 to measure 5% growth. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. REACH interim assessments (English Language Arts and math tests based on common core standards and i-Ready) that are administered twice per year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The School Quality Guide for 2017-18 shows that 95% of respondents had positive answers to questions about the social-emotional supports for students. 100% of teachers stated that students are safe in their classrooms and traveling to school and outside the school; 94% say students are safe in the hallways, bathrooms and cafeteria and 100% of teachers felt that adults teach students how to advocate for themselves. Thanks to our Attendance Improvement Dropout Prevention (A.I.D.P) grant, we have been able to make significant advances in the number and quality of mental and physical health supports for our students' social emotional needs. At our annual health fair in May 2018, over 150 people were in attendance and we had additional screenings and referrals for families on their health care. The nurse's office is clean and organized with informational posters for students regarding healthy lifestyle choices and the nurse keeps an open-door policy that is well-utilized. We also have been able to increase our 2017-2018 annual student attendance to 93% and reduce the number of chronic absences with the assistance of the Kinvolved communication app. While we still have some improvements to make 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  around consistency, Positive Behavior Intervention System (P.B.I.S.) has been implemented to support positive interactions among students across the school. There are a range of Expanded Learning Opportunities (E.L.O.) provided through the school's various partnerships with community-based organizations. Programming spans across literacy, STEM, the arts, and health activities and are used to engage students in learning beyond the classroom as well as to develop social emotional skills and peer relationships.. More than 160 students took advantage of the E.L.O. programs in 2017-18, which operated after school and during the summer. Despite these efforts, we have seen an increase in the number of OORS incidents in common areas in the school. We also recognize the need to continue our attendance initiatives as our overall attendance for the current year is the same as in the prior school year. On the School Quality Guide for 2018, only 50% of teachers felt students behave well in class when the teacher isn't looking and only 76% of teachers felt students follow the rules in class. Due to staff changes in 207-18, we were missing a full-time counselor, which may have contributed to increasing OORS incidents. With a full-time counselor for 2018-19 from Association to Benefit Children on our team, we hope to reinstate some programs such as Mindful Mondays that were successful in the past. These indicators suggest that not all staff members understand their roles in contributing to a positive school climate that fosters a safe and supportive learning environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, across all classrooms, teachers will continue to incorporate students' social emotional and emotional learning into daily instruction which will result in a 25% decrease in levels 4 and 5 infractions as measured by Online Occurrence Reporting System O.O.R.S.), as compared to the number of level 4 and 5 infractions, as reported on the 2017-2018 OORS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Organize and prioritize list of Expanded Learning Opportunities/Academic Intervention Services (E.L.O./A.I.S.) services, dates, target groups, and hours that can be monitored and disseminated to school teams on an on-going basis for the continuous referral of students to the proper services. Students will be referred to various ELO programs based on targeted needs, for instance referring ELLs to ELO programs that reinforce literacy strategies; referring SWDs to programs that provide more hands on and differentiated learning opportunities. Develop, implement and monitor system of referrals to E.L.O./A.I.S. services that will include a system of data collection to continuously hold stakeholders accountable for student academic learning and progress that integrates academic data with social emotional data (e.g., attendance, Success Highways, E.L.O. participation). Train teachers on Cloud-9 and Positive Behavior Intervention Support (P.B.I.S) programs. Develop a data system to record teacher implementation of these systems and use the data to provide additional supports to teachers. Teachers will engage in professional development activities around restorative justice practices; teachers will implement restorative circles in their classrooms to de-escalate behavioral challenges, with additional reinforcement of the use of these strategies for SWDs. Increase teacher utilization of Kinvolved and use the data to inform parents of workshops that will be scheduled to discuss the importance of student attendance during the school day as well as participation in E.L.O./A.I.S. programs for social emotional growth in an effort to expand our strategies to all stakeholders. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers, student support team Sept 2018 - June 2019 Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, TC REACH/Community School Director Teachers, Students Sept 2018- June 2019 Guidance, admin, counselors, C.S.D Teachers, students July 2018 - June 2019 District facilitators, administrators, teachers Parents, students Sept 2018 - June 2019 TC REACH/C.S.D, Parent Coordinator 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Based on parent preferences, workshops will be held to introduce parents to restorative justice strategies they can use at home to address student misbehavior. We also hope to expand family workshop programming to incorporate additional strategies for families to extend social emotional strategies into their homes. Workshops will be held bi-monthly during the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Human Resources: Classroom teachers; Guidance Counselor; Social Worker; Community School Director; REACH Family Support and Engagement Coordinator; Parent Coordinator; Data Coach Instructional or Material Resources: computer programs to organize data; computer program or other binder system to maintain and organize E,L.O./A.I.S. referrals; Success Highways testing materials; handouts and materials for parent workshops, data systems for Cloud-9/P.B.I.S. tracking Structural: system of communication and referrals regarding opportunities; time and meeting space for parent workshops; office for social worker Fiscal: money for supplies; social worker; E.L.O. opportunities; pay for teachers for A.I.S.    Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will see a 5% reduction in the number of student incidents reported in the O.O.R.S system between September 2018 and February 2019 as compared to the same time period last year (September 2017-February 2018). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use the O.O.R.S reporting system to assess progress to this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the School Quality Guide for 2018, 97% of teachers responded positively to questions about peer collaboration. 100% of teachers said they worked together to design instructional programs and 100% of teachers said they talk with one another about instruction. While there has been improvement in the attitudes and practices related to collaboration, there are ongoing concerns about the focus and the consistency of the collaboration. Observations of teacher teams during the 2017-18 school year suggest teams need additional support around inquiry and generating appropriate responses to students work. While teachers believe they have time to discuss instruction, only 73% of teachers responded that teachers are eager to try new ideas on the School Quality Guide for 2018. On the quality review from the 2016-17 school year, we received a developing score for indicator 4.2 around how well teachers work together. (We did not have a QR in 2017-18.) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  By June 2019, all teachers will have participated in professional learning cycles involving inquiry and intervisitations leading to 95% of students making growth of at least one grade level when comparing fall baseline reading levels to end of year reading levels (as measured with F&P). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Establish a schedule for inquiry and inter-visitations for teacher teams so that all teachers have an opportunity to participate in at least two professional learning cycles - one in the fall and one in the spring semesters - that focus on guided reading instruction to increase access to texts for SWDs, ELLs, and students below grade level. For each cycle, teachers will identify a strategy that will be the focus of observations, identify the target group that will be observed, conduct the intervisitation, and provide feedback to the observed teacher around implementation of the strategy and effectiveness for that particular subgroup. Provide additional oversight for the IEP team to ensure IEPs are of a higher quality; ensure teachers are informed of accommodations and modifications that are needed for SWDs and ELLs when determining strategies to be used during guided reading; use teacher team time to monitor progress of SWDs and ELLs on reading levels at least once per month. Use the Bridge to Practice Professional Development tool to track, monitor, and update a professional development plan that uses information about teacher needs coming from the inquiry cycles and observations to inform a schedule for inter-visitations and PD sessions, including visiting classrooms of peer schools, highlighting guided reading strategies. Conduct monthly observations of teacher teams; provide feedback to teacher teams using Troen and Boles rubric for effective teams. Feedback will focus on teams having a task focus, collaborative climate, leadership, shared accountability, and structures and processes that keep teams focused on instructional talk. Provide opportunities for teachers to turn-key information from PD sessions to their grade level teams to foster school-based collaboration around guided reading, focused on strategies that allow multiple entry points to text for reading groups at all levels. Teachers who have attended PD sessions on guided reading or reading instruction, or who have been identified as having strengths in these areas during observations, will be asked to design and deliver turnkey sessions to other teachers. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Fall 2018, Spring 2019 Instructional cabinet, Grade leaders, Admin team, Instructional coaches Teachers Sept 2018 - June 2019 IEP team; admin, Instructional Cabinet; team leaders Teachers Nov 2018 - May 2019 Instructional cabinet (team leaders, admin team, instructional coaches) Team leaders Nov 2018 - June 2019 IC; admin; coaches Team leaders Jan 2019 - May 2019 Team leaders, admin, IC Lead Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Based on student outcome data and teacher observation data, staff will be identified for professional development opportunities to bridge the gaps evident in the reading instruction in their classrooms. Based on funding availability and opportunities that are available, these PD options may include TCRWP, district reading PD, TC REACH coaching, or other external PD coaching. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers Jan. 2019 - May 2019 Data Coach, Lead teachers, Admin. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers have Parent Engagement every Tuesday from 2:20-3:00. This gives parents the opportunity to meet, work and collaborate with teachers to learn ways to support their children at home. Our school also has a monthly Open House every third Thursday of the month. Parents are invited to spend the morning in their child's classroom to learn with their children. The Community School Director, the Parent Coordinator, and School Administrators will host workshops before parents go into their child's classroom. Parents will be notified via the Kinvolved app, phone calls home, and fliers of family workshops and parent events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Human Resources: teachers attending external PD; team leaders; administrators; all members of teacher    teams Instructional/Material: curriculum guides; unit plans, lesson plans, teacher artifacts, student work samples; student data; handouts, books, or other materials from the PD sessions to give to the other teachers; protocols and data analysis tools; agendas Structural: communication systems regarding calendars, schedules, and data; time and space for teacher meetings; access and possibly additional support from PD providers to help teachers turnkey Fiscal: Per session salary for members of the Instructional Cabinet; per session for teachers to meet outside of regularly scheduled time if needed Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will compare the number of students who have improved their reading levels using F&P by at least one grade level since their performance on the baseline in fall 2018. By February. we will aim for at least 40% of students to have met or be on track to meet their growth goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  We will use F&P reading levels as the measure of progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve X X critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2018 School Quality Guide, 100% of teachers said the principal makes clear her expectations for staff, 95% of teachers say the principal has communicated a clear vision for the school, and 100% say the principal has high standards for student learning. 99% of parents responded positively to questions around how well the principal includes them in school decisions on the 2018 School Quality Guide. The P.P.O. visit from 2017-18 indicated that teachers were engaged in high levels of collaboration, suggesting the school leadership has set a tone that requires teachers to engage in instructional work. On the quality review, the school was proficient on allocating and managing resources and identifying, tracking and meeting goals. In an effort to establish consistency, the principal develops and disseminates a School Handbook to all staff at the beginning of each year that outlines the academic and administrative expectations. The principal provides teachers with the structures and materials, including time and meeting space, to engage in collaborative meetings. To foster 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  professional growth, the principal developed a professional development plan that provided teachers with multiple opportunities both in-house and externally to increase their pedagogy. An additional aspect of leadership at the school requires the ability to coordinate and manage the multiple facets of a community school model. The principal provides fiscal and supervisory support to several school-based committees or staff (e.g., the wellness committee, the attendance team, the parent coordinator, School Implementation Team, Professional Development Team, M.O.S.L.) in order to support the multiple initiatives that are central to the school’s theory of action. A challenge for the past several years has been a lack of administrative staff to assist with the completion of formal and informal observations; we've needed to repeatedly norm new Assistant Principals on the APPR rubric to ensure ratings and feedback is consistent. In 2018-19, we hope to welcome a new AP to the administrative team, and it will be important to monitor Advance data for alignment between administrators on what effective practice entails within each indicator of the Danielson Framework, resulting in consistent messaging to teachers about acceptable instructional practices. As an administrative team, there is a need to ensure consistency in the type, amount, and quality of feedback provided to teachers following observations or artifact reviews so that all teachers receive a variety of strategies that are specific to their needs. Based on teacher feedback, there is a desire for more job-embedded professional development, and the administrative team will need to ensure the instructional coaches are tasked with the appropriate work to make the greatest impact on student outcomes. A review of preliminary Advance data indicates the three lowest-scoring areas for teachers in 2017-18 were:  Designing Coherent Instruction (1E) with 65% effective.  Engaging Students in Learning (3C) with 53% developing; and  Using Assessment in Instruction (3D) with 65% developing. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of the leadership's strategic use of resources for professional development, by June 2019 we will see a 5% increase in APPR ratings for teachers in the areas of 1E, 3C, and 3D as compared to APPR ratings from June 2018. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Coordinated on-site professional development will be provided by the DOE Talent Development Coach (at least once per month), Teaching Matters (25 days over the course of the year October through June), and CS 154 instructional coach (during weekly Monday PD time) focusing on the instructional priorities identified to improve teacher practice. This includes strategies for using assessment data to provide targeted supports for SWDs and ELLs though guided reading groups and/or blended learning in math. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Selected Teachers Oct 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teaching Matters, DOE Talent Development Coach, instructional coaches Through formal and Informal observations scheduled according to each teacher's selection, administrators will review their feedback to teachers and norm their ratings to the Danielson Rubric when providing feedback to improve teaching practice. Feedback will be aligned to the instructional focus, which includes attention to the use of small group instruction for SWDs and ELLs. Teachers K -5 The Professional Development Team will communicate PD needs to the Instructional Cabinet bi-annually (fall and spring) to develop a professional development plan which will align the topics to the Danielson Rubric to teacher interests. Teachers Monitor the Professional Development calendar in 6-week cycles to ensure that time is built in to increase Teacher-Team collaboration to assess and plan for instruction in vertical teams. Teachers Oct 2018 - May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Professional Development Team, Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional cabinet Principal, Assistant Principal, Coaches October 2018; April 2019 Summer 2018; every six weeks between Sept 2018 - June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. There will be parent information sessions around leadership and additional strategies to further engage their students monthly starting December 2018. The workshops will be implemented by the Community School Director and the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  parent coordinator, who will work with Community Partners to facilitate the workshops. Responses from the Parent Survey and Focus Groups will help us to develop topics for workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Human Resource: Administration, Coaches, Talent Coach, PD Team, Instructional Cabinet  Instructional/Materials: PD calendar; books, guides, or other resources to support PD implementation; training materials on giving feedback to teachers Structural: schedules for job-embedded supports; time to review feedback to teachers; coverage for teachers attending PD; coverage for AP attending DOE training on Advance Fiscal: Hire Assistant Principal; hire Talent Coach; per session for PD team to meet; Hire Teaching Matters facilitators   Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, we will average the advance data for teacher observations between October 2018 and February 2019 and look for 2% increase as compared to the teacher scores at the end of June 2018 so that we know we are on track for our June 2019 goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The assessments that will be used is the advance teacher evaluation ratings.. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school has made great efforts to include parent voices in decisions at the school. For the 2018 School Survey, 100% of parents (257) replied. 99% of parents responded positively that the principal encourages feedback from the community and that the principal promotes family and community involvement in the school. 98% of parents say the school regularly communicates about how the staff can help their children learn; 97% say they feel well-informed by the communication they receive from the school, and 98% of parents felt they were greeted warmly when they call or visit the school. The school has held over 60 events to welcome parents to the school community including: Reading Nights (the school's most popular events with more than 30 participants at each session), the annual health fair with more than 150 participants, Family Fridays, and a range of other activities. The Parent Association actively participates in, organizes or helps facilitate family-oriented programming related to the school and there is a growing network of various stakeholders, school and community-based, to support the school's family engagement work (e.g. school's librarian and attendance counselors, Association to Benefit Children, Family Health Institute). With the addition of the Community School Director, the school has been able to increase the time and efforts dedicated to family engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Additionally, we recognize the need to gather more data on the changing demographics and interests of parents and extended families that support our students to better inform the variety of programs that we offer, and also the variety of time frames that would be convenient. We also recognize the need for additional family workers around data collection and analysis to provide information around the effectiveness of our family programming. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will hold a minimum of eight family engagement events to deepen the home/school connection and provide tools for parents to support their child's SEL and academic growth at which at least 20% of families (approximately 50 attendees) attend . 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Design, update and disseminate a long-term and monthly calendar for parents that will inform them of school-wide events: Parent-Teacher conferences; Book Fair; Family Reading night; attendance workshops; SEL workshops and other opportunities to engage in school activities. Parents, PA members Sept 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator, TC REACH/CSD, Social Worker, Parent Association Provide a series of Parent workshops in Mathematics and Literacy strategies for families of students in grades 3-5 focusing on test taking skills and reducing test anxiety. Advertising for these workshops will focus on parents of SWDs and ELLs. Provide a series of parent workshops for grades K - 2 families to support foundational literacy and numeracy strategies at home. Design and deliver parent workshops to inform parents about academics (instructional expectations, curriculum updates, state testing), social-emotional supports, and/or wellness initiatives, highlighting specific strategies for ELLS and SWDS. Parents Sept 2018 - May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, CSD Schedule TASC/GED program for parents; recruit parents; monitor attendance and satisfaction with the program. Parents Nov 2018 - June 2019 TC REACH/CSD Parents Fall 2018 Parent Coordinator, CSD, Administrators, Parent Association Conduct focus groups and additional parent surveys of SWD and ELL parents to gather additional data on new parents to inform types of programs and schedules for parent events. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. REACH/Teachers College; Association to Benefit Children; Harlem Children's Zone; Black Fem; and Harlem Grown will support our parent engagement efforts. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Human: Parent Coordinator, Community School Director, REACH Family Support and Engagement    Coordinator, Parent Association, Community Assistant, Administrators Instructional/material: Handouts and materials for parent workshops on academics; books for Family Reading Nights; resources for parents around Common Core and testing; TASC/GED materials; flyers, social media, Kinvolved system; food - breakfast or snacks Structural: Space for TASC/GED classes; space for parent workshop meetings; time and schedule for the workshops Fiscal: Kinvolved contract; cost of materials for workshops & reading nights; cost of TASC/GED classes; cost of food Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, by implementing a more coherent and targeted plan for parent engagement, we will held at least four parent events where at least 20% of families attended (50 families or more). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets and parent "passport" stamps from each event attended will be monitored to determine how well attended each workshop has been. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who score at Level 1 and 2 on state assessments and benchmark assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Interactive Writing, Guided Reading, Shared Reading, multi-sensory approach to teaching reading, Mathematics Science Students who score at Level 1 and 2 performance on state and/or benchmark assessments Students who score below 65% on chapter tests Fundations, Great Leaps, Reading Rescue, Readoruiumpilot program, and Expanding Reading pilot program Web-based Mathprogram- Grades K-5 to improve math fluency inquiry-based small group instruction in STEAM with a "traveling science teacher" consultant after school science club Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group, one-to-one, or pull-out services When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, After-school program Blended learning in small groups 5 days a week: 30 minutes per session small group instruction During the school day weekly small group instruction After school programming weekly 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38 Social Studies Students who score at level 1 or 2 on the Passport Curriculum unit assessments additional exposure to historical informational texts through AIS At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) At-risk counseling is offered to students who need additional support as referred by pupil personnel team. Apollo oral history program Counseling, peer play groups, socialization groups, Yoga Mindfulness Mondays small group During the school day weekly teaching artist Individual and small group Weekly, push-in to classrooms Support services are provided during the school day: daily Yoga is provided once weekly, after school. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 69 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Funds have been set-aside to provide instructional support for our students in Temporary housing. These funds will be used to purchase instructional materials as well as school uniforms for our students. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All efforts are made to hire teachers who are certified and licensed appropriately for their assignments to ensure that all teaching staff are Highly Qualified. Candidates are recruited from colleges and universities. Currently all teachers are assigned to classes based on their licensing area and grade preference within license and have been identified as Highly Qualified. Our goal is to ensure that each child is in a classroom with a highly qualified teacher, therefore we have implemented a committee that participates in the interviewing and observations of demonstration lessons conducted by prospective candidates. In order to recruit and retain Highly Qualified teachers, we establish partnerships with colleges and attend DOE sponsored job fairs. New teachers are provided with a mentor to provide job-embedded support in instruction and classroom management. Teachers are provided with opportunities to engage in self-selected professional development activities as well as school-based sessions to develop their practice and interest. In order to develop teacher leaders, we encourage our staff to share their expertise with colleagues to enhance teacher collaboration. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Monday professional development sessions are scheduled as provided by administration, Teachers College and DOE. ● Teacher Development Coach, provides professional development to selected teachers under 3 cycle series. One cycle has 3 to 4 double period sessions focusing of Danielson’s Coherent Instruction and Use of Assessments in Learning. ● Formal and Informal observation feedback with the use of the Danielson rubric to improve pedagogical practices ● Grade level meetings to discuss curriculum, student data, student work and next steps to align instruction to Common Core State Standards.  Teacher Team meetings to engage in inquiry process 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42 . Classroom inter-visitations to observe colleagues' teaching practice.   Teachers participate in vertical/horizontal grade level professional development to deepen their understanding of data to drive instruction. These sessions provide opportunities for teachers to share best practices and varied strategies.  Professional development sessions enable staff with time to revise and align the curriculum, based on the data and trends that are noted as they review student's work.  Paraprofessionals engage in grade level instructional professional development along with the cooperating classroom teachers to enhance their knowledge of the instructional strategies used to support students.  Paraprofessionals participate in off-site p.d sessions to provided them with the skill set to support students with academic intervention within the classroom.  Assistant Principal's institute provided by District 5  Assistant Principal attending the Executive Leadership Institute (ELI)  Principal attending annual conferences (e.g., National Association of Elementary Principals) and district 5 leadership conferences monthly . Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). During the first two days of school parents attend classes with their children for shortened sessions where they are introduced to the curriculum and the year long program that is being implemented. During the course of the school year, parents are invited into classrooms to participate in learning tasks with their children, so that they have an opportunity for hands-on learning with the students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Vertical alignment of curriculum maps to set expectations per grade level. Early intervention services are provided as needed based on assessment data. Parent workshop to inform parents of grade level expectations for each grade Open House for parents to visit classrooms and learn along with children; exposure to the school's curriculum. Parents are invited to participate in field trips and other enrichment activities with the students. Open House activities are scheduled during the spring to recruit and welcome incoming Pre-kindergarten and Kindergarten students and their families. Parent workshops are conducted for pre-kindergarten families to engage them in the transition process from Pre-K to Kindergarten. These sessions are conducted by the Social Worker, community School Director and Parent Coordinator. During the last month of school and during the half-days, students in Pre-K are introduced to eating lunch in the student cafeteria. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We have convened a Measure Of Student Learning (M.O.S.L.) team that makes recommendations to the staff regarding the assessments that will be used at the beginning and end of the year and that will factor into teacher evaluations. Periodic assessments are selected by the instructional cabinet, on which teacher leaders are asked to participate. We ultimately try to streamline the periodic assessments so that teachers can have uniform data sets to analyze collaboratively when they respond to the data in instruction. On an on-going basis, teachers are responsible for working with their teams to decide which performance tasks and formative assessments will be given to students, collected, and then analyzed with their colleagues. Teachers have participated in multiple professional development sessions to help them analyze data. Teachers have been trained in the Datawise cycle for responding to periodic assessments, and have participated in inquiry clinics to understand how to respond to formative data. The professional development committee that convenes monthly continues to review and discuss teacher needs in the areas of analysis and response to data. In addition, during common planning, teachers have the opportunities to learn from each other about how to review student work and trends to determine the supports needed for the supervisors or coach. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5C, 5E 5A, 5C 5C 5C 5A, 5C 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 208, 210.00 16,979.00 67,050.00 72,534.00 12,366 2631.00 2,075,666 X X X X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. C.S. 154 Harriet Tubman, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. C.S. 154 Harriet Tubman will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) C.S. 154 Harriet Tubman , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? At the core of TC REACH’s community school model is teaching and learning. Our goal is to align all aspects of our wrap-around services with coherence and intentionality that is grounded in academic data and classrooms. Our instructional specialist assists our schools with implementing a series of periodic assessments based on the state exams, and the outcomes of which are presented to teachers to tailor their classroom instruction and identify small groups of target students. We base our professional development for teachers around trends identified in instructional learning walks of classrooms and around periodic outcome data. In addition, we use academic data to guide programming for ELO/ELT and work to build connections between the school day and out of school time to support student achievement. We make efforts to support our schools in developing parent workshops that help parents understand skills they can reinforce at home. We have seen modest growth on ELA outcomes (3% overall) and math outcomes (7% overall) over the past several years with more students reaching level 3 on the state test. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our school will obtain 97% attendance (up 4% from last year's 93%. By June 2019, our school will decrease the school chronic absenteeism rate by 5%. By June 2019, PK attendance will obtain 93% attendance (up 3% from last year's 90%). By June 2019, there will be a 5% of PK parents involved in family events and workshops. By June 2019, through continuing to build on our increased family and community involvement at school events and other parent engagement activities, and implementing a more coherent and targeted plan for parent engagement, we will maintain scores of 90%-99% satisfaction on parent questions on the School Quality Guide. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  By June 2019, we will have provided dental screenings and vision screenings to 100% of our students. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? We believe that supporting students with wrap-around services and partners in their educational careers will help them to reach their academic potential. Providing students with a variety of engaging and rigorous ELT learning experiences – for remediation or enrichment – will help to spark student interest and support skills that can be translated into the classroom. Our attendance, health and wellness initiatives will help to minimize barriers to learning and build healthy habits so that students can come to school regularly and be prepared to learn. Engaging with families as partners for their students and to regularly celebrate student success will help to build support networks for students that emphasize the value of education and the importance of motivation in achieving academic goals. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Harlem Grown Target Population PK-5 TC REACH PK-5 Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal By June 2019, students in K-2 will show overall academic achievement in Science. Provides nutrition classes for K-2 students and provides environmental services to other grades The REACH initiative focuses on school leadership, pedagogical practices, expanded learning experiences, physical and mental health, and family engagement. REACH subcontracts with other CBOs to help support these areas of work. By June 2019, our school will obtain 97% attendance (up 4% from last year's 93%) and decrease the school chronic absenteeism rate by 5%; through continuing to build on our increased family and community involvement at school events and other parent engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Association to Benefit Children PK-5 Harlem Children's Zone K-5 activities, we will see an increase of 20% on the NYC parent survey; we will have provided dental screenings and vision screenings to 100% of our students, and will build a referral system to refer students and families for mental health services. By June 2019, ABC will build a referral system that will track families who receive additional mental health supports and provide treatment to those families. By June 2019, students enrolled in HCZ after-school program will show overall academic improvement and achievement. ABC will place an on site Social Worker at school that will provide individual and group counseling to students. The Social Worker will also work with families and make referrals to additional services Provide extended learning opportunities, homework help, nutrition and physical health education after-school daily from 2:30-6. Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources needed to support this work include: REACH staff, parent coordinator, attendance team members, student support team members, other partner CBO staff (Association to Benefit Children counselor; Harlem Children's Zone site coordinator). Instructional resources needed include access to the school's curriculum so it can be used to support PD and ELO experiences. We will need access to and opportunities to meet with teachers during professional development to monitor our efforts and communicate about the programs. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. C.S. 154 and REACH will continuously collaborate to ensure that the Community School program activities meet the NYC DOE requirements for a Community School. C.S. 154 selected Teachers College, Columbia University’s REACH initiative as its lead CBO under the A.I.D.P. program. REACH subsequently recruited and hired the school’s Community School Director. As part of the REACH model, C.S. 154 has engaged in an annual school improvement planning process that includes a needs and asset assessment accomplished through the REACH compilation of the annual data-based school case study that reflects information across the five key areas to identify assets, challenges and trends that is used to inform school planning efforts. The entire REACH team, including the Community School Director, and the school’s leadership team are involved in this process. The school’s ELO program has been structured to provide an array of academic offerings that primarily align to remediation and enrichment. For academic intervention ELO, students were subsequently assigned to the different offerings based on a review of their NYSED 2018 exam outcomes and reading levels. For enrichment opportunities, students can participate in lunch time clubs such as chess or Harlem Grown. After school, students have opportunities to participate in Harlem Children's Zone programming. There are also a variety of school day push-in enrichment programs including those led by TC graduate students for art and music, Studio in the School, Behind the Book and the Apollo program. The school has incorporated the Community School Director into its School Leadership Team. The REACH Family Engagement Coordinator and Community School Director work together to develop and administer surveys to parents to begin to obtain their input around the different topics. REACH will facilitate an annual parent focus group forum in Spring 2019, which is a key element of its model to provide parents with another opportunity to provide 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  feedback. Additionally, the REACH Family Engagement Coordinator and Community School Director work with the Parent Coordinator as well as its key partners to develop, implement, and monitor a family engagement calendar of activities that reflect REACH’s four pillars for engagement: parents as partners; educators as partners; adult education; and celebrations. At each of the planned activities, participants are surveyed about their needs, interests, and perspectives on the Community School programming as well as their interest and availability to volunteer in support of different aspects of the work. It is anticipated that as the number of participants as family engagement events increases, the REACH Family Engagement Coordinator and Community School Director will be able to expand the network of individuals engaged in the development, implementation, and monitoring of the family engagement calendar of activities from primarily the Parent Association Leadership and the Parent Coordinator. The intention is to ensure that the programming not only facilitates strong family and community ties but meaningful ones as well. REACH and C.S. 154 have established several layers of data-driven interfaces around the Community School program. The principal and Community School Director have a weekly standing meeting wherein the Community School Director provides the principal with current and available data around key indicators, primarily excerpted from the Student Sorter and Kinvolved, to strategize short-term and long-term plan adjustments. In addition to these meetings, the REACH Director has separate routine meetings with the Community School Director and the principal to address concerns and to ensure that the work of the initiative continues to be responsive to students’ needs and aligned to the school’s goals. These meetings also leverage data from the Student Sorter, Kinvolved, and NYSED Item Analysis. The principal and Community School Director also meet with other members of the REACH team (i.e. Expanded Learning Opportunities Specialist; Instructional Specialist; Family Engagement Coordinator) to review and troubleshoot activities that reflect their specific areas of programming and will use a variety of data sources that may include parent survey data, teacher outcomes on PD checks for understandings and feedback surveys, teachers’ instructional artifacts, and student work artifacts from ELO. There also are the bi-annual data dialogues with REACH, the school’s leadership and key partners; and the annual school improvement retreat. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students There are several REACH key personnel and partners that will be responsible for the design, implementation, monitoring, and refinement of the Community School program activities at C.S. 154. The REACH key personnel include: the REACH Director who supervises the entire university-assisted, community school initiative for Teachers College, Columbia University; the Expanded Learning Opportunities Specialist and manages all aspects of the extended leaning time, after-school and summer programs; the Instructional Specialists and is responsible for the design and delivery of all teacher professional development activities; and the Community School Director at C.S. 154 and provides school-based leadership around the different REACH components, particularly those related to Physical & Mental Health; REACH also employs a part-time Family Support and Engagement Coordinator. REACH key partners that also are responsible for elements of the Community School program include Association to Benefit Children; who supports the mental health activities; Smile Program provides programming around dental health development; Kinvolved to support activities to improve the school’s attendance improvement activities; TC graduate students, Behind the Book, Achievers, NY Chess Kids, Robo Fun, and Harlem Children's Zone enhance ELO and after-school programming. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  REACH and 154 leadership will continuously collect, analyze, and reflect on data across the five key areas to evaluate the program and assess the impact of activities on student achievement in order to make appropriate and timely adjustments. Qualitative (i.e. primarily focus group and survey data from different stakeholders) and quantitative data (i.e. primarily student attendance and behavioral incidents; promotion and assessment data such as NYSED ELA and math exams for grades 3-5) is used to monitor and evaluate the work both to inform decisions on how specific interventions might be improved (ongoing formative evaluation) and to measure progress toward final outcomes (annual summative evaluation). In addition to reviewing the school’s annual data published through NYSED and NYC DOE, REACH will collaborate with the school staff to gather and analyze data specific to the five key areas. For instance,the Expanded Learning Opportunities Specialist will use the NYSAN Quality Self-Assessment Tool to monitor all ELO activities in addition to tracking attendance through Kinvolved as well as conducting routine reviews of student work for targeted sample of students. The Family Engagement Coordinator collects attendance and feedback data from parent participants at each event. The Community School Director collects data on student attendance through Kinvolved as well as from key partners to include the information in the school’s Student Sorter so that there is a comprehensive data set for each student (demographics, outcomes, and interventions). The data collected and documented through the Student Sorter data are shared with the Data Specialist who will conduct a set of analyses as determined by questions posed by REACH and 154; and the analyses are reviewed for action/program adjustments. While the data is analyzed, shared with the school, and used by the REACH team throughout the year, twice per year, REACH, its partners and 154 leadership meet for a data dialogue so that they have dedicated time to collectively review the information and make decisions about any adjustments that may be needed. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Human resources needed to support this work include: REACH staff, parent coordinator, attendance team members, student support team members, other partner CBO staff. Instructional resources needed include access to the school's curriculum so it can be used to support PD and ELO experiences. We will need access to and opportunities to meet with teachers during professional development to monitor our efforts and communicate about the programs. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. REACH activities will begin in summer 2018 and continue through the entire academic year (through June 2019). Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Based on NYSESLAT data as well as data obtained from formative assessments administered in the classrooms, our English Language Learners (ELLs) continue to make increased gains in the listening and speaking modalities; however, reading and writing are not considered to be on grade level for some of our ELLs. To support and enhance reading and writing Common Core Standards, we will have an after school program that will enhance literacy through the content areas through project based learning in grades 2 through 5, which are the grades with the largest number of our ELL population. We anticipate 1 ENL certified teacher serving 12 students in grades 2-3, while the other ENL certified teacher serves 18 students in grades 4-5. Participating students are in the Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding levels according to the 2018 NYSESLAT data. The program would be held on Wednesdays and Thursdays for 31 sessions from January 16, 2019 through May 22, 2019. The sessions will be for 2 hours each, being held from 2:30 - 4:30 PM. Instruction will be imparted in English by 2 certified ENL teachers. We anticipate serving 30 students, who comprise our grades 2 through 5 ELL population and are at the Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding Levels of English Proficiency. Through project-based learning, students will be exposed to additional standards based content that will help them attain the academic language they need to succeed in their grades. Students who participate in this supplemental program, will work to develop their academic language through project-based learning with an interdisciplinary approach having all subjects integrated. Differentiated strategies will be used to target those students who are at the previously mentioned proficiency levels, so they can achieve the Commanding proficiency level on the NYSESLAT. Student progress reports, along with formative assessments, frequent observations and conferences will be used to monitor students’ academic progress. Instruction will focus on academic language and vocabulary development; thematic, content-based instruction; differentiated instruction for language and literacy; and a daily instructional routine in oral language, reading, and writing. Materials used will be teacher created through thematic units. Title III funds will be utilized to purchase chapter books and picture books to enhance and support literacy in addition to educational trips. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Based on 2018 NYSESLAT data, our ELLs struggle in Writing. One of the ENL teachers will attend district based Writing Professional Development provided by Brian Green. These sessions will take place October 17, November 28th, December 18th, 2018; and January 16th, February 26th and March 19th, 2019. The second ENL teacher will attend Professional Development for ELL Leads provided by the Manhattan Field Support Office September 21, October 31, December 7, 2018 and January 15, March 7, 2019. Both ENL teachers will turnkey strategies relevant to ELL achievement to classroom teachers during Teacher Team Meetings that take place every Tuesday from 2:20- 3:35 PM. In November, discussions in these meetings will be about NYSESLAT data and proficiency levels of English. In December, we will focus on culturally responsive instruction, January- February will be spent looking at student classroom work and analyzing trends. March- April sessions will be spent on looking at NYSESLAT samplers and planning strategies to create readiness for the assessment. May and June will be spent on reflecting on strategies that worked, and modifying what needs improvement for the next school year. These Professional Development sessions are at no cost to Title 3 funds. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Monthly open houses are held on the third Thursday of each month starting September 2018 through June 2019. During these sessions parents are invited to visit their children's classrooms to understand the curriculum and learn strategies to extend the learning at home. All teachers of ELLs are responsible for leading these monthly sessions. The ENL teachers in collaboration with the community school director, and parent coordinator, plan to host a Multicultural Night in November 2018, showcasing the students' cultural backgrounds to be shared amongst the school community. This is a way to get families involved in their child's education, and exchange cultural information between other families. Parents are invited to accompany their children on school trips. Trips and community walks are ongoing September 2018- June 2019. Parents are informed and encouraged to participate in school-wide activities via flyers and calendars. All flyers, invitation letters, and written documents are submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit to be sent home with students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities in the family's home language. Parents are also notified by phone via an automated system which is also available in languages other than English as well as the Smartphone App, Kinvolved, allowing teachers to communicate with families in their preferred language. During the parent workshops, one of the ELL teachers interprets the information being presented in Spanish, and parents who need interpretations in Arabic are paired with other parents who also speak Arabic and are proficient in English. The Language and Interpretation Unit is also available as needed for any other languages. In February 2019, the ENL teachers will host a parent workshop to inform parents of state exam dates and how they can help their children prepare for these at home. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 05 School Name Harriet Tubman Learning Center Borough Manhattan School Number 154 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Elizabeth Jarrett Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mara StulbergerMarlene Acevedo Teacher/Subject Area Yvonne LaRoche Teacher/Subject Area Alanna Francis Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Danika Rux Assistant Principal Joy Brinson Coach Nicole Damiani School Counselor Wendy Mejia Parent Cenita Thigpen Parent Coordinator Monique Kennedy Field Support Center Staff Member Alice Cohen Other (Name and Title) Karoline Alexander,Community S C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 292 Total number of ELLs 54 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 18.49% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses data from TCRWP Running Records, AR Early STAR, STAR Reading, and teacher created assessments to assess students and guide instructional planning for our ELLs and monitor academic progress of our ELLs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers, support staff, and instructional coaches look at the data obtained from the aforementioned assessments during common preparation periods, professional development sessions and Tuesday team meetings. During these meetings we: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  As we try different strategies to support our ELLs, we evaluate students' strengths and weaknesses; modify lessons, instructional strategies, and teaching materials to best suit our students' academic needs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? NYSESLAT, ELA and Math Interim Assessments, Performance Series, and Running Records, IXL math are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Flexible grouping is created and students are targeted based on their academic needs. The instructional coaches provide support to classroom teachers, ENL teacher, and support staff in order to provide the necessary scaffolds and quality instruction to our students. We have implemented a blended learning model , teaching mathematics, focusing on direct instruction in smaller groups . 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We guide instruction for ELLs within the Response To Intervention framework by utilizing data from different sources such as: School Net Benchmark Assessments; assessments from TCRWP, and assessments embedded in the Core Curriculum. These data determines whether students are at risk for not meeting standards in a given academic subject. Once students are identified they are grouped in one of the three tiers (Tiered Model For Instruction and Support) based on the content in which they struggle. Student performance is monitored to identify which students are making progress and make changes to instruction and intervention. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We take into consideration all data available from NYSESLAT, ELA, and Math assessments to evaluate our ELL program. We use the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) to help focus on the specific needs of the students and inform our ELL programs and guide our teaching. By using this tool we are able to see patterns, as well as the needs and strengths of our ELL students. We also look at the grades that have been most successful so that these classroom teachers share the strategies that worked for teaching and engaging parents, so that these strategies can be implemented school-wide. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The instructional coaches, teachers, and administrators look at the data and make decisions on which students will be moved into a different class or group based on their progress. Teachers also attend professional development sessions and school inter-visitations to observe best practices in teaching methodology tailored to address students' academic needs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  All ELLs in grades K-5 receive the appropriate amount of minutes weekly as per CR Part 154.2. ELLs who have reached a proficiency level of Entering and Emerging receive 360 minutes of instruction per week. At least half of the time will be spent working on the English language and the other part will be integrated ELA or other content area. Students who have reached a proficiency level of Transitioning or Expanding will receive 180 minutes of instruction per week. This instruction will be integrated with ELA or other content area instruction. The content area taught is connected to that which is being taught in the students' classroom at the time of instruction. The students are grouped based on their grade and proficiency levels. Students may be in a group with other students in their grade or in a contiguous grade (i.e. Kindergarten ELLs may be grouped with grade 1 ELLs and grades 2 and 3 ELLs in a different group). Instruction is differentiated to target the students' individual academic and language proficiency needs. b. TBE program. If applicable. We currently do not have a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. We currently do not have a DL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students with an English proficiency of Entering and Emerging receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Instruction is delivered through 180 weekly minutes of Integrated ENL, 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA and 1 unit of study in ENL during Stand-alone ENL for a duration of 180 weekly minutes. Students at the Transitioning and Expanding levels receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction, which is provided in 1 unit of study in ENL/ELA. Students at the Commanding level are entitled to 90 minutes of ENL instruction per week for 2 consecutive years, and it is provided in an Integrated ENL model during ELA instruction or other content area, based on the needs of the students. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The goal of our ESL Program is to provide instruction in a rigorous learning environment where students' needs and differences are acknowledged and respected to achieve English proficiency. In order to reach these goals we utilize scaffolding strategies such as modeling: We use content areas as medium for second language learning, focusing on vocabulary and developing literacy through thematic units. Instruction supports the comprehension of challenging material through the use of strategies such as: Classroom teachers and the ENL teacher meet regularly to discuss ways to help make the curriculum more accessible to the ELLs and meet their needs, to make it easier for these students to understand what they are being taught. The Teachers College Program is used for reading and writing. The ENL and classroom teachers collaborate to scaffold the lessons. Concepts are often reintroduced in the ENL classroom to increase understanding of the content taught previously by their classroom teacher. Academic language and content vocabulary words are taught within the grade level curriculum. These strategies make the content more accessible to our ELLs. Students are introduced to new concepts and vocabulary words through picture support and background knowledge. Teachers often use shared experiences such as read alouds, shared writing and hands on activities which help them develop a deeper understanding of the content. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To evaluate students' in their home language throughout the school year, students are asked to read a book in their home language and write about it in English. They are also asked to keep a writing journal to log personal experiences and other topics of their interest in their home language. Then they are encouraged to read it aloud to the ENL teacher. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE- it is important to determine their level of English proficiency and create a schedule which provides the student the amount of ELL instruction s/he needs. This student would be grouped with students who have similar academic needs in order to provide small group and collaborative learning activities, along with intervention strategies to target the student so they can approach grade level, until eventually the student meets grade standards. All teachers who work directly with the student should have conversations to utilize common strategies to help this student, plan instruction jointly and have common materials to heighten student performance. b. Newcomers- are provided with a risk free, welcoming environment to meet the transitional needs some face being newly arrived immigrants. These students are encouraged to become involved in learning English through role play, simulation, projects, field trips and scaffolded lessons. It is important to provide informal assessments in order to know students' prior knowledge and build on the skills they already have so they can acquire new skills. Home language support may be provided through home language print, technologies, translations and interpretations in the home language, and encouraging "buddy systems" of students who speak the same home language, and allowing collaborative work among students with similar cultural backgrounds. c. Developing ELLs- students who have had ELL status for 4-6 years are also those students who take state exams in addition to NYSESLAT: (i.e., ELA, Math, etc.) and are taught explicit test taking skills. These students are encouraged to enroll in the school's After School Program for further support. We encourage collaborative work as well as buddy systems when needed, continue the use of visuals, explicit teaching of vocabulary, close reading strategies, modeling, continue to utilize graphic organizers to monitor comprehension in reading and plan writing, and utilizing rubrics and peer and self assessment checklists. d. Long Term ELLs- Closely monitoring data is crucial to differentiate instruction for long term ELLs. This way we can identify where the students are struggling and tailor instruction to address those needs. Providing RTI support if needed ensures that students who are at risk receive the intensity and differentiation they need, and as the student makes progress, intervention is gradually removed until the student becomes an independent learner and is able to engage in self-assessment strategies and create academic goals with prompting and support from the teachers. e. Former ELLs- continue to receive testing accommodations of separate location and time extension up to two years. They are invited to be a part of the supplemental Title 3 program (After School) and their data is closely monitored to ensure they are meeting grade level expectations in all content areas. Former ELLs also receive mandated Integrated ENL services of 90 weekly minutes up to two years after they exit ELL status. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs utilize the same instructional materials as their non ELL peers for all subject areas so that they are exposed to their grade and age appropriate materials; however, they receive the appropriate scaffolding in order to access academic content. Among the scaffolding provided are: use of math manipulatives, more visual representation to reinforce learning, videos and tutorials, targeting small group instruction, using graphic organizers and checklists to monitor student progress, pre-teaching and reviewing, using verbal prompts, directions reread, teacher redirection, direct modeling, multi-sensory instruction, taking frequent breaks and having clear and consistent class routines in each classroom. Some of the technology used to support ELLS are the use of smartboards in all classrooms, used to project videos, pictures, audio content, among others. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Students have access to laptops, computers, and tablets to log in to web based programs that promote specific skills such as: ten marks for mathematics, and Achieve 3000, Renaissance AR Reading Program for literacy. Grade 2 and 4 ELLs will work on the Velocity Program with the goal to advance reading skills. Words Their Way is utilized as a word study program that enhances decoding and encoding of words by studying word patterns. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility enables ELLs and SWDs to achieve their IEP goals by ensuring they are in a least restrictive environment at all times possible. Flexible programming allows students to receive a combination of direct and indirect services by allowing time for special educators to collaborate with general educators and look for ways to apply instructional techniques and strategies that best work for that particular student. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The enVision Math Program has an embedded intervention program. Classroom teachers, support staff, and the math instructional coach are responsible to differentiate activities for struggling and advanced students, regardless of what ELL subgroup they belong to. These interventions are offered in English with some home language support for our Spanish speaking population. As for ELA, Grades 2 and 4 students will utilize the Velocity program to enhance reading skills. This program is web-based and it differentiates activities according to the students' reading level. It is utilized by students 20 minutes each day, 3-5 times a week. Targeted intervention allows setting high expectations for all students, provide multiple entry points into the curriculum, deliver appropriate instruction, and monitor progress to allow students to move between tiers as needed. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the 2018-19 school year, emphasis will be given to literacy across all grades. ELLs will receive Integrated ENL services during the literacy blocks, which allows students ample time to focus on reading grade appropriate texts and answering constructed response questions. Stand-alone ENL instruction will also target developing the English language needed for content areas through reading and writing. Programming has been modified to include integration in the classroom in addition to stand-alone to maximize learning opportunities for ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have not had any bilingual programs and closed them. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Grades 3, 4, and 5 students have the opportunity to attend an after school enrichment program that provides the quality instruction to promote grade readiness. This program is tailored to enhance students' academic needs in math and English Language Arts. One day a week, students receive supplemental instruction in ELA and math. ELLs are invited to participate in all programs via letters sent to parents and flyers. These documents are translated in the parents' preferred language. Other supplemental programs available in our school are: 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Some of the instructional materials used to support our ELLs are "flocabulary" tutorial videos, flashcards, books, big books, maps, globes, manipulatives, electronic tablets, Common Core aligned "modules", project based activities drawn from instructional models, such as Engage NY, among others. All classrooms are equipped with Smartboards that project videos, visual and auditory aids that are helpful to ELLs. Students have access to desktop and laptop computers, and tablets in order to access web-based intervention and supplementary programs such as: Achieve 3000, Velocity, tenmarks, and Renaissance AR reading. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is delivered in the ENL program through: Home language support is assessed by asking students to read a book in their home language and writing about it in English. They are also asked to keep a writing journal to log personal experiences and other topics of their interest in their home language. Then they are encouraged to read it aloud to the ENL teacher. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our ENL Program follows both, Integrated and Stand-alone instructional models in which students are provided academic support along with peers who are in the same grade. Students at the Entering and Emerging Proficiency levels who are in two contiguous grades may be placed together in a Stand-alone group for 180 weekly minutes of ENL instruction. The students are taught based on their grade level's curriculum, while using resources such as picture support and realia to help them understand the content while accessing prior knowledge and making connections to other things that the students already know. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Although we share a building with Democracy Prep Charter School, our students have access to common areas such as gymnasium, cafeteria, and auditorium. There is a schedule that guides who will use these areas at specific times. The school library and related services are spaces of our own that are not shared with Democracy Prep. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). ELLs are invited to attend Summer Enrichment Programs for the purpose of language and social immersion. During the summer, the school coordinator, social worker, and parent coordinator are involved.On an ongoing basis throughout the school year, the parent coordinator hosts meet and greet activities for parents of newly enrolled students.Students are teamed up with "Buddies" that introduce them and show them around school so they feel acknowledged and comfortable as newcomers. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We currently do not offer any language electives to our ELL population. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We currently do not have a DL program. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our school has ongoing professional development to ensure that classroom instruction stays strong and promotes academic success for all students. Professional development opportunities are provided to all school staff. Instructional strategies that are learned at PDs outside the school are shared with all teachers and they are encouraged to try these newly learned strategies in their own classrooms. The ENL certified teachers provide workshops throughout the year to assist classroom teachers in their instruction teaching ELLs within their own classroom setting. Some ELL related workshops being provided are titled: - 'Welcoming ELLs into the Classroom' - 'Teaching Tools and Strategies for ELLs in the Classroom', - 'ELLs and Language Acquisition', - 'Academic Language and Vocabulary' - 'ELLs and Advanced Literacy Instruction' The focus is on making content more accessible and interactive in ways that support ELLs and all learners. Other professional development opportunities are provided by the Manhattan Field Support Center (MFSC). There are also various opportunities throughout the year, such as: 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As per CR 154 a minimum of 15% of the required professional development hours for all teachers must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. The ENL teacher is responsible for facilitating sessions to engage the staff in the aforementioned topics. For the English as a New Language teacher, a minimum of 50% of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. The ENL teacher will attend professional development activities provided by the Office of ELLs and the Manhattan Field Support Center (MFSC). The ENL teacher will turn-key information to the staff about what was taught at the workshops offered by the MFSC along with other ELL related topics, such as 'Welcoming ELLs in the Classroom', 'ELLs and Language Acquisition', 'Academic Language and Vocabulary', and 'Advanced Literacy Instruction'. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  The ENL teacher holds annual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss their child's goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. These meetings are held in English or any language the parent understands. Interpretations can be done via over the phone services, using in-house bilingual staff, and some parents prefer to bring a relative who interprets for them. Translations can be requested by calling the Translation and Interpretation Unit. If parents are not able to attend an on-site meeting, a conference call can also be held with interpretation by the Translation & Interpretation Unit. A letter would then be sent home in the parent's preferred language as a follow-up summarizing what was discussed during the over the phone meeting. Phone logs would also be kept for record keeping purposes of the conference calls or other meetings being held over the phone. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Notifications of all of these events are sent home in the parent's preferred language. The Parent Coordinator also makes personalized phone calls and sends automated messages reminding parents of the events. Messages are sent in English, French, and Spanish. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Elizabeth Jarrett, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Harriet Tubman Learning School DBN: 05M154 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Elizabeth Jarrett Title Principal Joy Brinson Assistant Principal Monique Kennedy Parent Coordinator Mara Stulberger ENL/Bilingual Teacher Cenita Thigpen Parent Yvonne LaRoche Teacher/Subject Area Alanna Francis Teacher/Subject Area N/A Nicole Damiani Coach Coach Wendy Mejia School Counselor Danika Rux Alice Cohen Karoline Alexander N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member --------------------------------------- Other Community School Director Other -------------------------------------------- Other ---------------------------------------------- Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/2/18 10/2/18 10/2/18 10/2/18 10/2/18 10/2/18 10/2/18 10/2/18 10/2/18 10/2/18 10/2/18 10/2/18 10/2/18 N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 05M154 School Name: Harriet Tubman Learning Center Superintendent: DanikaRux The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Monique Kennedy Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our school Language Access Coordinator (LAC) collects the language preferences of our parent community for both written and oral communication from various sources, such as: the student's registration form,   Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS),   student's Emergency Contact Card, and ATS reports (RAPL, RCPL). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  The LAC then calculates the percentage of each language population, the number of languages represented and current language resources available in house. This data is disseminated to teachers, administrators, and testing coordinator in order to plan effective communication with parents. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Chinese French Malagasy English Spanish 27 3 4 1 243 46 8.31% 0.92 % 1.23% 0.31% 74.73% 14.15% 28 3 4 1 242 46 8.62% 0.92% 1.23% 0.31% 74.46% 14.15% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Welcome letter September Flyers /invitation ELL Parent Orientation September Flyers/ invitations to school events Ongoing throughout the school year Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Send to the Translation Unit during the month of August to ensure it is translated before the first week of school. Send to Translation Unit at least two- three weeks prior to the event. Send to Translation Unit at least two- three weeks prior to the event. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide IEP meetings Ongoing throughout the school year Parent Teacher Conferences November, March Open-House Parent Night September, May interpretation service(s)? Use in-house bilingual staff and over the phone interpretation services. Use in-house bilingual staff and over the phone interpretation services, and vendors if needed. Use in-house bilingual staff and over the phone interpretation services, and vendors if needed. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency we have the Kinvolved message system which allows school staff to send parents text messages in their preferred language. In addition, the school messenger (blast system) sends out voice recorded messages to parents in English, Spanish, and French. We have also disseminated information to staff on how to access language assistance using over the phone interpretation services in order to communicate with parents. There are a few low-incident dialects spoken by some of our families, such as: Fulani, Mandingo, and Wolof. These dialects do not have a written system. Most parents who speak these dialects also have listed French as their preferred language of communication, therefore written communications are sent home in French and English. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Bilingual staff members are available to interpret during formal face-to-face meetings in school. Official documents such as field trip consent forms, lunch forms, home language surveys, among others are available in the school and ready to be disseminated to parents. Student Specific Critical Documents such as letters of: entitlement or placement in any educational program; health and safety are available to parents in the covered languages. An email has been sent to all staff members, which provides details on using the existing translated documents, how to request translations of school official documents, and how to access over the phone interpretation services to ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education. Communications to staff are also reinforced in weekly staff bulletins, and in person during staff Professional Development sessions. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..)  Parents have received the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services.  Our school also has a Welcome Poster indicating the availability of interpretation services.This ensures parents are not prevented from reaching the school's office due to language barriers. The security and main office staff have a Language ID Guide available.  Brochures, flyers, and any parent engagement events are given to parents in their preferred language.  Over the phone interpretation services are accessed via the Language Line and utilized as an important tool to communicate with families. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? A parent survey will be administered to parents of all cultures and languages to gather feedback on the quality and availability of services in our school. This survey is available on the Translation and Interpretation Unit's Intranet page. An oral survey will be conducted using the Language Line for languages that may not have a written format. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78 
