 03M163 School Name: P.S. 163 ALFRED E. SMITH Principal: DONNY LOPEZ   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Alfred E. Smith School 03M163 School Number (DBN): 310300010163 PK,K,1,2,3,4,5 163 W. 97th St., New York, NY, 10025 (212) 678-2854 Phone Number: (212) 678-2856 Fax: Donny Lopez dlopez17@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Donny Lopez Kelly Aherne PTAPresidents: NickiReidyand Agnes Zakrzewska Samantha Seigel n/a n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 3 Superintendent’s Office Address: Ilene Altschul Superintendent: 154 W. 93rd St., New York, NY 10025 ialtsch@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-678-5857 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: 2122227816 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) YuetChu Executive Director:   333 7th Ave., Rm. 828, New York, NY, 10001 Executive Director’s Office Address: ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-356-7564 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Donny Lopez Kelly Aherne Agnes Zakrzewska Mary Harvey Samantha Seigel Matthew Goodwin *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Co-Chair/Parent Co-Chair/Teacher Member/Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) StefaniaPuxeddu Allyce Fucigna Alan Arbel Cyrus Boquin Nathalie Roussel Lauren Jones Andrea Duncan-Mao Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 163 is a learning community that provides our students with the tools they need to become academically outstanding, socially responsible critical thinkers. Our well rounded developmentally appropriate curriculum leads students to develop confidence as learners, examine and assess ideas, and contribute meaningfully. Through skillful teaching, our educators promote critical reasoning and problem-solving as they help their students establish a firm foundation of literacy and mathematics skills they can apply to real world experiences. Our social   studies and science instruction challenges the children to examine ideas that shape their world. The cluster programs offer students an exposure to the arts, science, and technology. Our program of instruction and enrichment is rigorous, creative, and highly motivating: it prepares our students to enter the middle school of their choice. The teachers and administration share a common bond with parents as we set our students off on a journey of self-discovery that will make them responsible citizens of an ever changing world community. The goals of our parent association help many families make PS 163 an integral part of their lives. The PS 163 community is sensitive to the individual needs of children. We foster respect and promote a peaceful environment. We encourage students to be curious, creative, and self-motivated. We help students establish work habits and a love of that will lead them to success throughout their education and into adult life. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 163 has four academic programs: General Education, Integrated Co-Teaching, English-Spanish Dual Language, and Gifted and Talented. In addition to our classroom teachers, we have two science teachers, an art teacher, a music teacher, a computer teacher, and a physical education teacher. Through partnerships with outside organizations, students also receive instruction in dance and chess. We also have the learning partners program which is an initiative from Carmen Farina, which is program designed to promote interschool collaborative learning to improve the educational experience for all New York City students. This program focuses on collaborative conversations and students engaging in learning through conversation. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We provide Special Education in a Least Restrictive Environment. The vast majority of students with individual education program are in the integrated co-teaching classroom. Students classified as ENL receive services via pullout ENL services and via Spanish dual language. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During 2017–2018, we made progress in all of the elements of the Framework for Great Schools. For example:  Rigorous Instruction—We increased our focus on supporting ELLs and SWDs in English Language Arts. We made major improvements in our ELA curriculum by adapting and modifying the ReadyGEN program and integrating it with the best components of the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project curriculum and our own innovations. We also improved our implementation of the GO Math! curriculum. Supportive Environment—We continue the use of Second Step, a social and emotional learning (SEL) curriculum, to nurture students’ development and growth as members of a community defined by mutual respect and support. We also expanded our use of the Three B’s model from Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports, instilling the values of being respectful, being responsible, and being safe.   Collaborative Teachers—Our teachers work together in grade teams and in literacy and math teams. Our literacy and math teams have been particularly effective in revamping our ELA and math curriculums.  Effective School Leadership—Our school principal has worked closely with the School Leadership Team to  develop and implement innovative goals that authentically reflect the school’s priorities. Strong Family-Community Ties—We created a Family Outreach Committee, which significantly increased and improved the collaboration of parents and staff on building our school community and working toward shared goals. 0   Trust—We began to work on making the educational and social experience of being a student at P.S. 163 more consistent for students across our four academic programs. Our Comprehensive Educational Plan includes goals that address all the elements of the Framework for Great Schools. This reflects the strong commitment of our teachers, administration, and parents to set ambitious goals for our school and to work collaboratively to achieve them. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M163 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 565 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 11 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 48.0% % Attendance Rate 45.3% % Reduced Lunch 5.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 42.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 30.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.1 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 62.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 94% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 87 86 93.5% 2.1% 17.9% 16.3% 5.8% 4.8% 2 0% 5.5 66.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of regularly kept teacher records as well as state test results reveals that significant numbers of both Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and English Language Learners (ELLs) are not meeting target levels of proficiency in English Language Arts, mathematics, or both, or are not on track to meet target levels of proficiency by the end of the school year. Many of these students are among the lowest-performing third of students. Supporting them will help prepare these students for success in middle school while also reducing the achievement gap. In 2017-2018, we set and achieved the goal that by June 2018, 46% of our SWDs in grades K through 5 who were performing below grade level in ELA, will demonstrate a year's worth of growth, from the beginning to the end of the year, as measured against the Teacher's College Continuum over the course of the year, correlated to the grade level equivalent of the student's baseline running record level. Our new goal reflects our committment towards higher standards. For the upcoming school year we will look into increasing the percentage of students reading on grade-level from 30%. We believe that this goal will support our students have greater academic success. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase the percentage of our 1st - 5th grade students classified as students with disabilities (SWDs) reading on grade-level from 30% to 40% as measured against the Teachers College Running Record Continuum. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Analyze Running Record levels to identify SWDs who have not achieved target levels of proficiency Students classified as: SWDs September 2018 - June 2019 Data specialist Use the three-tier Response to Intervention (RTI) model to support their growth towards achieving targeted levels of proficiency. Students classified as: SWDs September 2018 - June 2019 Classroom teachers 1st - 5th and S.E.T.S.S. provider Provide professional development to all staff members on effective strategies for supporting under performing SWDs. Allocate professional learning time for teacher teams to review ELA units of study and identify where SWDs are offered supports, what scaffolds exist, and what additional supports and scaffolds are needed. Teachers in grades 1st - 5th September - October 2018 Grade leaders (GL), Learning Partners Program (LPP) team, and administration Grade teams in 1st - 5th September 2018 - June 2019 GLs and administration Use grade teams to identify strategies that are working and to identify additional strategies and supports that may be needed. Grades 1st - 5th GLs September 2018 - June 2019 Parents of children who are performing below grade level will be offered additional extended parent-teacher conferences during Tuesday parent outreach. All teachers will meet one-on-one with the principal at three roughly regular intervals (“trimester meetings”) to discuss the individual students identified as the lowest-performing third in ELA their classes. At the first trimester meeting they will (1) discuss these students’ shared needs as identified by the teachers, (2) develop strategies to address those shared needs, and (3) make an action plan. At subsequent meetings they will review and analyze progress on the previous action plan and then repeat the three-step process described here. Between trimester meetings, teachers will invite selected parents to “interim checkpoint” meetings to discuss strategies to address their children’s needs. Families of students classified as: SWDs September 2018-June 2019 Classroom teachers 1st - 5th grades and administration Teachers in grades 1st - 5th September 2018 - June 2019 Administration and teachers in grades 1st - 5th Parents of students classified as: SWDs September 2018 - June 2019 Administration and teachers in grades 1st - 5th 4 For children with Individualized Educational Programs (IEPs) that require related services, the resources of their service providers will be leveraged to support their growth in ELA. Students classified as: SWDs September 2018 - June 2019 Special education teachers and S.E.T.S.S. provider This goal and action plan will be communicated to the teacher of English as a New Language (ENL). She will contribute to the achievement of this goal for SWDs by assisting classroom teachers as necessary. ENL teacher September 2018 - June 2019 Administration and ENL teacher To minimize summer learning loss, the SLT will create a summer scholars challenge and communicate to parents of SWDs effective strategies that they can use to support their children over the summer. Students classified as: SWDs June 2019 - September 2019 SLT members, administration, and classroom teachers in grades 1st - 5th 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school engages families and supports their understanding of rigorous instruction and common core through opportunities to meet with teachers including back to school night and family engagement time on Tuesday afternoons. Families are also invited to Cafe 163 on Friday mornings to learn about various topics including homework, testing and how to help your child at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. a. GL meetings take place every Friday at the per-session rate (pending allocation of funding) b. GLs will meet with the principal during Monday professional learning time to monitor the growth of SWDs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 51% of SWDs in grades 1 through 5 who were performing below grade level in November 2018 will be reading on grade level as set forth in the Teachers College running record continuum chart for January. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachers College running records assessment. 5  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our 2017-18 student levels 3-4 infractions increased from 26% in 2016-17 to 33% of all incidents reported within the NYC DOE online occurrence reporting system (OORS). Our school has recommitted to using the Positive Behavior Interventions and Supports (PBIS) Three Bees program in conjunction with the Second Step social emotional learning (SEL) curriculum throughout the school (i.e., classrooms, lunchroom, clusters, etc.) to support all of our students in dealing with their emotions. We have implemented SEL to support the students in dealing with anxiety and resolving conflicts. We have created a letter for parents outlining the discipline policy of the DOE and PS 163. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will decrease the number of levels 3-4 infractions from 65 to 55 as measured by Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) data. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Track and assess disruptive behavior within PS 163 and discipline measures used. Review and expand the existing PBIS discipline policy to include consequences using the DOE Blue Book and the results of the assessment. Review and expand the warning system teachers use to inform students that they are behaving incorrectly. The system will enable the student to change his/her behaviors to move up the scale. Publicize discipline policy within the school community Grades PK–5/school wide community. School psychologist, guidance counselor and SAPIS worker provide recess guidance. The behaviors that occur during recess and necessitate the school aide bringing the child inside will be tracked and reported to the classroom teachers. ( Both the details of the infraction and the consequences that occur). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Grades K–5th September 2018-June 2019 Administration, SLT members, school support team, and classroom teachers. Grades PK-5 September 2018-June 2019 PBIS committee members PBIS kicked off with an assembly on September 7, 2018. Grades PK-5 September 2018 Administration and PBIS committee PBIS committee will provide PD to all staff ensuring everyone is trained to follow the PBIS protocol for rewarding positive behaviors and consequences. Grades PK-5 September 2018-June 2019 PBIS and administration A letter has been written outlining the discipline policy of the DOE and PS 163. This letter will be sent to the DOE translation department to be translated into all languages spoken in our school. This information has been collected from Tiffany Opong, our ENL teacher. The letter will be reviewed at Parent Teacher Conferences (PTCs) in November 2018. If the Blue Book of Grades PK-5 Families November 2018 ENL and classroom teachers 8 Discipline is available this will also be given to parents at the November PTC. The letter outlining PS 163’s discipline policy will also be posted on the PS 163 web site with a link to the blue book. Grades PK-5 Families November 2018 Administration The PBIS committee meetings will take place on Thursdays after school at the per-session rate (pending allocation of funds) PBIS committee and administration had a school wide launch on September 7, 2018. Every school assembly will start with the students reciting the PBIS ‘bees of behavior.’ An administrator will give out a bee at each assembly to the class who followed the 3 bees during the assembly. Administration is providing the school aides with instruction on how PBIS will be used in the lunchroom and recess. The PBIS committee and administration will develop a plan to ‘advertise PBIS’ in the lunchroom and hallways. PBIS committee and administration will develop a plan to provide training/support to teachers requesting aid in launching PBIS. Similar to the student removal form, a SWIS (school wide information system ) follow-up behavior/consequence form for a major infraction will be used by administration to inform teachers about a student(s) who were involved in the incident (describe nature of incident) and any consequences that will be implemented due to the incident. Students who need to see an administrator due to a major infraction will be escorted to room 122a. The students will also be escorted back to the classroom. The form detailing the major infraction and consequence will be given to the classroom teacher. If a teacher is not informed, an email request to the administrator will be made for the information. PBIS committee members September 2018-June 2019 Grades PK-5 September 2018 Grades PK-5 September 2018-June 2019 School Aides September 2018-June 2019 Grades K-5 November 2018 Grades PK-5 November 2018 PBIS Committee PBIS and administration PBIS and administration Administration PBIS Committee and administration PBIS Committee and administration Grades PK-5 September 2018-June 2019 PBIS Committee and administration Grades K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive the discipline letter (and or the blue book) during PTC in November. For parents not attending PTC the information will be backpacked home. A copy of the letter will be posted on the PS 163 web site. In addition, during monthly Cafe 163 parents will be engage on school-related topics such as: general response protocols, city-wide discipline policy, and social emotional learning (SEL) curriculum Second Step. Materials related to SEL will support families in continuing work on building empathy at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 9  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The SLT will coordinate this effort, working closely with the key personnel identified above. A data specialist will be paid per session (pending allocation of funds) to monitor and track the discipline infractions on SWIS. PBIS members will be paid per session (pending allocation of funds) if the meetings occur after school hour Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a decrease of 5% percentage points from 33% to 28% of reported levels 3-4 student infractions as measured by OORS data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS data will be used to measure and assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2017-18 Quality Review identified indicator 1.1 Curriculum as well-developed. Our staff has worked via numerous committees such as the literacy and math teams to integrate and ensure units of study are both rigorous and aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. This year, the school decided to focus on the Math Examplars in order to improve discussion techniques among students, increase students’ number sense and their understanding of word problems. The school has been using Examplars as a way to analyze students’ data and improve students’ skills in mathematics. For the past five years, students have been solving Examplars’ problems, developing their communicative skills, making connections, improving their explanation and presenting their strategies in a clear and efficient way. Examplars are administered at the beginning, middle and end of the year. By focusing on Examplars, teachers will work collaboratively to analyze students’ works and focus on improving students’ understanding of word problems. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 60% of all students will have increased one level along the Examplars rubric, from the beginning of year unit compared to the end of year. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Grade team will meet to review beginning of the year Examplar and analyze data. K-5th grade teachers December 2018 Grade leaders Data committee will analyze beginning of the year Examplar and provide a grade analysis of students performing at the novice, apprentice, practitioner and expert level. Students K-5 December 2018 Data committee & administration PD on Examplars for newly-hired classroom teachers on calibrating and using the Examplars rubric. Grades K-5th Mid Jan Administration 2019 PD with staff to brainstorm ideas on how to improve Examplar success among students Grade teams will meet to analyze 2nd Examplar (due 02/01) Grades K-5th End of Feb. Administration 2019 Feb. 2019 Administration 2 teachers (1 lower & 1 upper grade) Grade teams will meet to analyze 3rd Examplar (due 05/15) Grades K-5th End of May Administration Inquiry based discussion by the school's grade team members regarding data trends throughout the school year. Grades K - 5th 2019 June 2019 Grade teams & administration Data committee and grade leader will analyze end of the year Examplar and provide a grade analysis of students performing at the novice, apprentice, practitioner and expert level. Students K-5 June 2019 Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the year 2019, one Examplar will be sent home so that students may solve one Examplar problem with the family. This way, caretakers will understand the components of the Examplars (communication, connection, problem solving, reasoning and proof, and representation). Additionally, Cafe 163 will present to our families a PD 2  on Examplar rubric. During the event, administration will take the opportunity to present Examplar activity as a way to promote math talk and discussion techniques in the classroom. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School budget will be used to continue the subscription to Examplars library. School budget will be used to pay Examplars PD and substitutes (pending allocation of funds) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, 30% of all students will have increased one level along the Examplars rubric, from the beginning of year unit compared to the middle of year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Examplars rubric. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. On the 2017-18 Learning Environment Survey (LES), the Effective School Leadership component received a score of 3.46 up from 2.73 in 2016-17. Through the use of various school committees, distribution leadership was evident amongst the staff leading to an increase in feeling part of school-wide decision making. 2. The 2017-18 overall measure of teaching practice (MOTP) for Danielson component 3c (engagement) received a school-wide teacher average of 3.27 out of 4. Component 3c looks at the folling: are students engaged in inquiry? and how rigorous are the tasks they are engaging with? The goal for section 5D - Effective School Leadership will look to support teacher practice via professional development to: a.) calibrate the word engagement, b) use and apply a rigor matrix to rate the level of rigor within given student tasks, and c) create lessons that provide suitable scaffolds to provide access to the curriculum for all learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase the overall Danielson component 3c (engagement) school-wide teacher average from 3.27 to 3.50. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school professional development (PD) committee has created a year-long calendar to support staff on grade team meeting time to: a) lesson plan together, b) apply a rigor matrix to lessons, and c) conduct inquiry analysis on student work. Administration and grade leaders will review three rubrics that target rigor and select one to use for school-wide purposes. Teachers in grades PK - 5th September 2018 - June 2019 PD committee and administration Teachers in grades PK - 5th November 2018 Administration Administration will communicate clearly the mission of the school, will educate the staff on the CEP during a Monday PD, and will allow time for regular staff to review and provide inputs on the CEP during Monday PD. Classroom teachers and paraprofessionals in grades PK - 5th November 2018 Administration and CEP subcommittees On Election Day PD during the fall, the staff will be provided with grade team meeting time to begin work on implementing engagement strategies within lesson planning. Classroom teachers and paraprofessionals in grades PK - 5th November 2018 CEP subcommittees Principal Lopez will work bi-monthly with the grade leaders to: a) calibrate the word engagement, b) lesson plan with a goal of including engagement protocols, and c) calibrate the level of rigor within lessons. Classroom teachers and paraprofessionals in grades PK - 5th September 2018 - June 2019 Principal All teachers will receive face-to-face feedback from an administrator following all observations with a focus on engagement 3c. Classroom teachers in grades PK - 5th September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, teachers PK-5, clusters. and other staff under Danielson Framework for the Measure of Teacher Practice Monthly meetings with the UFT Consultation Committee, a committee of teachers that meets with the principal regularly to discuss matters of concern, will occur on the first Thursday of the month at 7:30 a.m. to update members on the progress of engagement. Classroom teachers in grades PK-5 September 2018 - June 2019 Principal and consultation committee Minutes of the PD committee will be shared with the staff for transparency and for teaching members to note their PD committee members are bringing to the table their insight. Classroom teachers in grades PK-5th September 2018 - June 2019 Consultation committee 5 Professional development (PD) committee meetings will occur bi-monthly on Tuesdays from 3:20 to 3:55 p.m. Classroom teachers in grades PK - 5th September 2018 - June 2019 Administration and PD committee members Principal will work with the learning partners program (LPP) team to conduct three cycles of learning on engagement to support teacher practice. Classroom teachers in grades PK - 5th The administration will work with the grade leaders (GL) during bi-monthly meetings to review PD calendar and assess alignment of topics to engagement. Classroom teachers in grades PK-5 September 2018 - June 2019 April 2019 PD committee Administration and ordering committee The school's equity committee will work alongside the PD committee, GLs, LPP, and administration on PDs centered on engagement and equity. By December 2018, administration and GL members will prepare data on the school-wide overall average Danielson component 3c score. Classroom teachers and paraprofessionals in grades PK - 5th Classroom teachers and paraprofessionals in grades PK - 5th September 2018 - June 2019 Equity committee, PD committee, GLs, LPP, and administration December 2018 Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Principal will send 'Principal Newsletter' every other month to inform families about school's vision, school-wide events and academic progress. The same topics will be shared during monthly PTA meetings. Administration will collaboratively spearhead a Cafe 163 on engagement and its connection to equity. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Committees working beyond contractual work hours will be paid at the per session rate (pending allocation of funds) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019, there will be an increase from 3.27 to 3.4 as evidenced by component 3c (engagement) of the Danielson Framework for Teaching rubric. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 6  Danielson Framework for Teaching and Learning. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school's strength relative to strong family and community ties includes: a) monthly Café 163 covering topics such as NYS exams, b) coordinating fall feast celebration, and c) drop everything and read (DEAR) event. The priority need that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element is to implement student-led conferences for all 5th graders during this year's parent teacher conferences. We believe that empowering out students with the opportunity to verbalize how they are doing academically and where they need to grow will lead to higher student outcomes. Our school's vision is to nurture and support the opinions and ideas of its students. The implementation of student-led conferences ties in seamlessly with our vision. Throughout the school year, all parents in the 5th grade will be invited to attend workshops on the implementation of student-led conferences. Through these workshops, parents will be able to best support students at home during homework assignments (i.e., defending opinions and ideas) and as their children prepare for middle school interviews. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all 5th grade students will increase by one level all fifth grade students’ beginning-of-year (BOY) self-evaluation using the collaborative conversation rubric as a result of work centered on student led conferences. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration will ensure that the 5th grade teacher team is supported via professional development on the implementation of student-led conferences. 5th grade teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Administration and 5th grade GL Use Cafe 163 as one venue for family outreach and to support families in understanding the benefits of student-led conferences and how they can support at home. Families in grades PK-5 December 2018 Produce all family communication through various modes and languages including: flyers in backpacks, flyer distribution in the morning before school, email communication, website, etc. Families in grades PK-5 Host staff-led family workshops on supporting your child at home with collaborative conversations strategies. Families in grades PK-5 September 2018 - June 2019 January 2018 Families in grades PK-5 Ongoing communication between the SLT, PTA, and Parent Coordinator to create a collaborative effort. Families in grades PK-5 September 2018 - June 2019 5th grade GL, parent coordinator, and administration Parent coordinator Administration and parent coordinator Parent coordinator, SLT members, PTA, and administration 9  In communication and outreach efforts, SLT parent representatives will each serve as a point person for their respective programs. September 2018 - June 2019 Parent coordinator Café 163 — Monthly workshops coordinated by the parent coordinator covering topics from school-wide assessments to NYS Exams. Families in grades PK-5 September 2018 - June 2019 Parent coordinator and administration Drop Everything and Read (DEAR)A week-long event that invites families or an important person for each child into the classroom to read with the students for one period. Each day of the week will target a different grade (e.g., Tuesday will be for fourth grade families). . . Families in grades PK-5 February 2019 Administration and teachers on the CEP subcommittee . . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our school works via the mayor's THRIVE program to connect families (struggling with mental disabilities) with organizations/agencies that offer appropriate medical treatment. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monday PD time to plan for school-wide events Per-session (pending the allocation of funds) for events taking place outside of work hours Funding for substitutes to provide coverage during events that take place during the school day Funding materials and resources for school-wide workshops and events Advertisements (flyers, etc.) 0  Childcare Translation services Flexible scheduling Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A 21st Century Grant X SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will increase by 75% all fifth grade students’ beginning-of-year (BOY) self-evaluation using the collaborative conversation rubric as a result of work centered on student led conferences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School created collaborative conversation rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in grades K–2 reading below grade level as per the Teachers College Benchmark Reading Levels. Students in grades 3–5 not meeting proficiency levels as per the NYS ELA exam. Students in grades K–2 working below proficiency levels as per first marking period report card grades. Students in grades 3–5 not meeting proficiency levels as per the NYS Math exam. Students in grade 4 not meeting proficiency levels as per the NYS Science exam. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) A. Guided reading B. Repeated reading C. Phonics instruction Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) A. 10:1 with classroom teacher B. 1:1 with JCC tutor C. 1:1 with JCC tutor When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) A. During Max Scholar, 7:45 a.m. to 8:15 a.m. B. During the student’s lunch period C. After school two days a week Marilyn Burns math enrichment 1:1 with JCC tutor After school two days a week Per session Science enrichment 10:1 with classroom teacher During Science Enrichment, 7:45 a.m. to 8:15 a.m. 2  Social Studies Students identified as reading and writing below grade level as per Trimester Talks with the school’s administration. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students identified by classroom teachers (ongoing throughout school year). Social Studies committee has created curriculum pacing calendars that incorporate multiple entry points for all subgroups such as: leveled-texts, book walks, vocabulary identification. Counseling sessions 8:1 with S.E.T.S.S. provider During the school day 1:1 or 1:3 During the school day 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) -- 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. . Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 60 students. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  Through the use of STH funds, the school will purchase school-related materials such as: notebooks, book bags, markers, and folders. Additional items that support student learning will be purchased via STH funds including: eyeglasses, clothing, and payment for school-related trips. Instructional support vía STH funds will come in the form of Max Scholar for students reading below grade level. Students in grades 3rd - 5th will he offered exam sophistication in the winter months prior to the NYS ELA and Math exams. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. PS 163 was allocated $31,991. 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The school's hiring committee reviews resumes, interviews candidates, and observes demo lessons leading to the selection of staff that are: 1) working within their professional licensed area, 2) aligned to the rigorous expectations of the school and 3) exceeding the hiring committee created rubrics. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Through our professional development (PD) committee, a year-long PD calendar is created that reflects the school's vision to nurture and support the opinions and ideas of all students leading to equitable practices. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 6  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The school's grade leaders committee reviews and selects school-wide assessments in collaboration with the shool's administration. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 7  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S.163 Alfred E. Smith , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [School name] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 0  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 1  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S.163 Alfred E. Smith , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 3  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 4  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 5  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: Unfortunately, our English Language Learners (ELLs) have historically failed to make progress as per their NYS exams. In analyzing our school-wide data in both ELA and math, it is evident that our ELLs are reading below grade level and lack the fundamental skills to succeed with grade-level mathematics. Our After School Program will provide ELLs with direct instruction in reading and math strategies that we hope will promote their educational growth. In addition to improving their scores on their NYS exams, our Title III program's goal is to increase the number of English Language Learners reaching the commanding level as per the NYSESLAT examination. For the 2017-2018 school year, 27% of our Kindergarten through 4th grade ELLs achieved proficiency on the NYSESLAT (8 out of a total of 29 English Language Learners). For the 2018-2019 school year, our goal is to have 35% of our current English Language Learners reaching proficiency with the support of the Title III program. Our After School program will serve ELLs from Kindergarten through 5th grade. PS163 has approximately five kindergartens, four first grade ELLs, ten second grade ELLs, eight third grade ELLs, eight fourth grade ELLs, and eight fifth grade ELLs. The proficiency levels of our first and second grade ELLs vary; however, the majority of students are at the transitioning and expanding levels. Schedule and duration: Our After School Title III program will begin the week of 10/12/2018 and conclude the week of 02/08/19, and the program will run on Fridays from 2:45 to 4:45pm. Activities: Our English language learners will be separated into two groups for our Title III program (a lower elementary group and an upper elementary group). Each group will have their own classroom for instruction, and each classroom will be co-taught by one bilingual or ENL teacher and one general education teacher. The fifth teacher will work as an instructional coach in both classrooms. The lower elementary program will use the online programs "ABCYA" and "Learning A-Z" to support their English language development. In addition, the lower elementary teachers will use guided reading, read alouds, "Thinking Maps for English Language Learners," collaborative conversations, and Reading Rescue/Reading Recovery strategies to support the language acquisition of these students. Consequently, our upper elementary students will also use "Learning A-Z" to support their English language development. The teachers of this after school program will focus on grammar instruction for writing, close reading strategies, "Thinking Maps for English Language Learners," and work with ELLs to close and guided read short differentiated texts from NEWSELA, ReadWorks, and Learning A-Z. Additionally, the after school program will host a variety of special events, which may include: Cultural Day, Decathlon, Lunar New Year, Black History Month, Flag Day, and the End-of-Program Celebration. Language of instruction: The Title III After School program will be in English. 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information # and types of certified teachers: Our After School Program will be staffed by five NYS certified bilingual or ENL teachers. Types of materials: Our After School program will use "Reading A-Z" and "Thinking Maps for English Language Learners." There will be no materials purchased with Title III funds, as the materials needed for the program are already available within the school. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: We apply research-based coaching and teaching strategies to support our teaching and learning communities. We are also committed to effective differentiated professional learning opportunities for systemic change. Professional learning opportunities for our bilingual and ENL teachers throughout the year are numerous. They include ENL strategies in the content areas, re-occurring Ready Generation professional development, ELL study groups, and vocabulary study groups. Our Title III after school teachers will engage in three ELL study groups over the course of the program. Aligned with our school-wide focus, the first ELL study group will take place on Tuesday, November 27 from 3:20pm-3:55pm during profession work time. The study group will focus on purposeful talk in the classroom as it relates to our English Language Learners. Our ELL lead will share information and resources obtained during the Manhattan FSC workshop session on this topic. Additionally, participants of the first study will also use the resource "Comprehension through Conversation: The Power of Purposeful Talk in the Reading Workshop" by Maria Nichols to further enrich this professional learning opportunity. During the second ELL professional development, teachers will focus on familiarizing themselves with additional graphic organizers that can support English language development. This study group will take place on Monday, December 10, 2018 from 2:40pm-3:40pm. Our ELL lead is a trained facilitator in "Thinking Maps: Path to Proficiency for English Language Learners," which is an ELL specific program created by Jane C. Buckner, Ed. S. During the second study group, our ELL lead will share specific graphic organizers that can be beneficial when working with English Language learners. The focus of this session will be how to use these graphic organizers to modify/differentiate instruction for English Language learns at each of the proficiency levels. Now that participants have gained some familiarity with the needs of their students, the third professional development session will be a study group that utilizes the educational resource "The Reading Strategies Book" by Jennifer Serravallo. The wonderful educational resource focuses on scaffolding reading instruction based on the needs and levels of the students. Teachers consider specific goals for students, consider the skills necessary to achieve those 9  Part C: Professional Development goals, and finally they determine specific strategies. The educational resource also includes anchor charts, prompts, and lesson language for each strategy described. This study group will take place on Monday, January 7, 2019 from 2:40pm to 3:40pm. Additionally, teachers working our Title III program will also receive ongoing PD during Monday's professional development time, and they will have the opportunity to seek out other professional learning opportunities offered by the DELLs (e.g. webinars). In addition, teachers working our Title III program will be provided with opportunities for inter-visitations of other ENL and bilingual classrooms to further support ELL teaching and learning. Our professional development plan will positively impact the progress of our ELLs by supporting the development of the educators of our English Language Learners. Teachers will have the opportunity to expand their knowledge of ELL methodology and teaching strategies, which we hope will make a positive impact of the development of our ELLs as measured by the NYSESLAT examination. We will maintain agendas and attendance sheets for all ELL professional development in an ELL compliance binder located in the ENL classroom. The educational resources used to professional development will be at no cost to the school, as the resources are already within the school and copies will be made accordingly. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Our Title III After School Program is in the third year of its initiation. The school's parent coordinator (PC) and the ENL teacher will conduct three ELL parent workshops on instructional practices used for English Language Learners, and facilitators will provide a connection to skills learned in the classroom that can be reinforced at home. Schedule and duration: The three parent workshops for our Title III After School program will take place on Tuesday, December 8, 2018 from 2:45-3:45pm, Tuesday, January 21, 2019 from 2:45-3:45pm, and on Tuesday, February 5, 2019 from 2:45-3:45pm. The parent workshops will be at no cost to the school, as they will take place during Tuesday's parental engagement time. Topics to be covered: The parent coordinator and the ENL teacher will cover: instructional practices, Thinking Maps for English Language Learners, format and structure of the NYSESLAT, an overview of the Targets of Measurement, explanation of the students' current proficiency levels, and descriptions of key standards covered and language learning strategies that can be applied at home. They will also provide parents with information about Duolingo, so that the parents of our English language learners can improve their own English. 0 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Name of providers: Walkiria Santana, Parent Coordinator and Tiffany Opong, ENL Teacher How parents will be notified of these activities: Flyers will be backpacked home in both English and Spanish one week before each workshop. Information about the workshop will also be provided on our school-wide family event calendar that is backpacked home at the start of each new school month. In addition, our Title III program will be posted on our school's PTA website and the PTA calendar. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $12,285.85  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff n/a Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. -Per session rate ($60.65) for 5 bilingual/ENL or Classroom teachers for 17 weeks (Fridays from 2:45-4:45pm). The ELL coach will not work for three weeks. $12,285.85 n/a and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a n/a n/a Water Bottles, Pretzels, Apples, and Chips $12,366 n/a n/a $80.15 Title III Supplemental Program 1  2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 03 School Name Alfred E. Smith Borough Manhattan School Number 163 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Donny Lopez Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Tifffany Opong Teacher/Subject Area n/a Teacher/Subject Area n/a Related-Service Provider Kelly Aherne Superintendent Ilene Altschul Assistant Principal Andrea Woodhouse-Spence Coach n/a School Counselor Jennifer Smullian Parent Nicki Reidy Parent Coordinator n/a Field Support Center Staff Member Fanny Castro Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 9 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 6 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 528 3 Total number of ELLs 38 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.20%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE TBE TBE DL Lang. SP School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1998-1999 1 1 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 6 0 0 6 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS 163 conducts a variety of assessments to help our teachers plan effective instruction for students. Teachers conduct running records four times each year in English using the TCRWP assessments. We also conduct running records in Spanish twice a year. For math, teachers administer a Beginning of Year (BOY) and End of Year (EOY) assessment aligned to the GO Math curriculum to measure growth. The exam includes multiple choice questions across grade level standards, which are taught during the school-year. Data is disaggregated based on each standard and teachers use the information to plan groups accordingly. In the DL classrooms students learn math in both English and Spanish. These assessments in addition to the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math state tests provide information to help us plan more effectively for our students. The running records in both languages allow the teachers to effectively plan to help the students gain understanding in the areas that are causing difficulty. Running records reveal deficiencies in decoding, comprehension, and responding to literal and inferential questions based on texts. It reveals students' reading levels and provides a targeted gap analysis for teachers to use to create small 4  groups and differentiated educational paths. Tracking the running records has also allowed teachers to see the students’ growth overtime. The data from small group work showed continuous growth in the lower grades. However, in the upper grades when the reading began to advance at higher levels, it was difficult for the students to reach the prescribed reading level for their grade based on the TCRWP level. Often the rate of growth decreases as the texts become more difficult. Despite this, ELLs did continue to grow to a new reading level. In addition, PS163 uses current NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores to guide instructional planning for our ELLs. More specifically, the scores are used for instructional groupings for ENL instruction or for instructional groupings in our Dual Language program. Furthermore, ENL students take a beginning of year and mid-year practice NYSESLAT. The practice NYSESLAT is taken from NYSESLAT questions available on EngageNY. This practice NYSESLAT is used to determine specific areas of need in Reading, Writing, Listening, and Speaking, and data obtained from these assessments are used for instructional planning. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Each grade (K-5) has its own year-long instructional calendar located in the school's Google Drive account. This spreadsheet contains all units of study in math, reading, writing, science, and social studies, and an assessment calendar that all teachers prescribe to. In addition, the assessment calendars outline when TCRWP running records must be completed and inputted into each teacher's trimester folder in Google Drive. The spreadsheet for TCRWP running records in the trimester folder highlights level 1 students in red, level 2 students in yellow, level 3 students in green, and level 4 students in blue. These structures help teachers use formative assessments to guide instructional planning for ELLs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? PS163 uses the NYS ELA exam, the NYSITELL, and the NYSESLAT for our summative and baseline assessments. Data provided from these assessments are used to identify baseline, progress, and areas of need. The data reveals that the majority of our ELLs require further support in academic writing. Therefore, the primary focus of ENL instruction is improving the academic writing produced from texts read aloud or text read independently. Instruction focuses on improving students' abilities to provide text-based answers to specific writing prompts. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The principal and assistant principal conduct trimester talks with teachers twice a year. During those conversations, teachers use summative, along with formative data, to identify students in need of additional academic support. Teachers and administrators together complete a trimester talk form, which outlines specific interventions for each student identified as needing additional academic support. P.S. 163 Alfred E. Smith also offers a morning reading program called Max Scholar to struggling students in grades K-5, Exam Sophistication after school to students in grades 3-5. They have a Title III afterschool program for ELLs and partner with the JCC for tutoring. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Classroom teachers use quarterly assessment results when creating differentiated instruction. As an initial step, teachers will identify students that are exceeding standards and those who are in need of academic support. When crafting classroom lessons, teachers align lessons based on the academic need of the majority of the class. RtI levels are implemented to provide ELLs with targeted instruction based on individual academic need. Teachers will use multiple sources of standards-based assessments and monitoring (e.g., conferring notes, performance based assessments, etc.) to determine areas to target. Students are provided with smaller group instruction and additional scaffolds within higher levels of the RTI model. In addition, teachers engage in Trimester Talks with administrators three times per year. During Trimester Talks, teachers discuss their bottom one-third of students (determined by TCRWP Running Records and ELA and math assessments) and teachers and administrators collaboratively determine Tier 2 and Tier 3 interventions intended to improve student outcomes. Furthermore, assessment data (e.g. NYSESLAT scores, ELA and math state test scores, TCRWP running records, and Beginning of Year and Mid Year Math assessments) is used within AIS to determine students in need of additional services. More specifically, assessment data is used to determine students in need of additional instructional time. For example, within AIS students are provided with opportunities for additional literacy instruction through Max Scholar in the mornings, and JCC Tutoring and ELL Enrichment opportunities are provided for students after school and during the summer. 5  6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT and the NYS ELA exams are used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs. The 2016 NYSESLAT revealed the majority of our ELLs are at the transitioning and expanding levels. Only two students remained at the entering level after receiving a full-year of services. Our upper elementary outcome assessment data reveals that our students have remained on the intermediate/advanced or the transitioning/expanding levels and typically obtain approaching scores (level 2) on the NYS ELA exams. In addition, the data from the NYSESLAT reveals that the majority of our ELLs (K-5) obtain the lowest scores on the writing modality of the NYSESLAT, and therefore during integrated and stand-alone ENL instruction the ENL teachers focuses primarily on improving academic writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers receive printed NYSESLAT scores (the RLAT from ATS) for each ELL student at the beginning of the year, and teachers are able to use the modality report to inform instruction. Additionally, at the beginning of the school year, the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) is compiled by the ENL teacher. Afterwards, the school principal emails the EDAT to all teachers in the school, in order for teachers to view ELL trends and look at specific data for individual students. Teachers are then able to make adjustments to instruction based on the needs of their students. The ENL teacher is also available during the first two months of the school year to answer any ELL related questions that teachers may have. Additionally, upper grade teachers participate in an item analysis professional development, where they review ELA and Math state exam questions and student performance. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. All students in the Freestanding ENL program will be placed heterogeneously in two classes for each grade level K-5. Entering, emerging, and transitioning students receive both stand-alone ENL and integrated ENL for 360 minutes per week. These students will receive integrated ENL 180 minutes per week, which will be co-taught by a certified ESOL teacher and a certified K-6 elementary school teacher. The ENL teacher and the classroom teachers will coordinate as best they can so that students receive integrated ENL primarily during ELA and Social Studies instruction. With careful planning, students at the transitioning, expanding, and commanding levels will sometimes move from their general classroom into another grade-level classroom in order to receive integrated ENL. Moreover, entering and emerging students will be pulled-out for stand-alone ENL for 180 minutes per week, and transitioning students will be pulled-out for 90 minutes per week. Stand-Alone instruction will be delivered by the ENL teacher in the ENL classroom in small groups for students within two contiguous grades. For example, students in second and third grades will be grouped together for Stand-Alone ENL instruction. During ENL instruction, students at the entering, emerging, and transitioning levels will be grouped heterogeneously. Our expanding students will receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL per week, and our commanding students will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL to further support their language development. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Available at P.S. 163 c. DL program. If applicable. The Dual Language program transfers literacy skills from a child’s home language in Spanish to a child’s second language of English. Students are able to acquire literacy more effectively in the language most familiar to them. Skills 6  used in native language acquisition (e.g., making sense of print, using writing to communicate, playing with language structure, developing vocabulary) are skills that a child uses to foster a more successful acquisition of English literacy. The learners can transfer their dominant language into English to build their understanding of reading strategies, background knowledge about texts, and knowledge of concepts from their native language. Dual Language program is also designed to continue developing students’ native language, as well as English language skills, throughout schooling. In addition, monolingual English students are given the opportunity to learn a second language. Dual Language programs serve both language-minority students in need of English language development and monolingual English-speaking students who are interested in learning a second language. Both groups provide good linguistic role models for each other and, through their interactions language is development in both languages. Additionally, certified bilingual teachers provide stand-alone and integrated instruction for ELLs within the classroom in small groups. Students at the entering and emerging levels receive 180 minutes of stand-alone instruction per week, and transitioning students receive 90 minutes of stand-alone instruction per week. Stand-alone instruction is delivered in small groups where ELLs are taken aside by the bilingual teacher, and ELLs receive language instruction designed to meet their specific learning needs through the use of targeted language objectives, graphic organizers, and other scaffolds. Furthermore, expanding and commanding ELLs in our dual language program receive integrated ENL for 90 or 180 minutes per week during ELA and Social Studies instruction. ELLs are placed in a small group, and ELL methodology is used by the bilingual teacher to scaffold and differentiate instruction for ELLs. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL The school follows the NYS regulations that require that students, grades K–8, at the entering and emerging levels of English proficiency must have two units/360 minutes of ENL instruction. For students at the transitioning and expanding levels of English proficiency, students in all grades must take one unit of ENL. A unit of instruction, as defined by state regulations, is 180 minutes per week. Furthermore, students at the commanding level receive .5 units of study per week/90 minutes of ENL instruction. ELL students are grouped together in general education and special education classes. It is our goal to encourage integrated instruction for students wherever possible. The ENL program is based on the students’ NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores. The program is designed to provide services in increments of 55 minutes sessions to meet the needs of each student. Stand-alone ENL instruction is delivered to students in a separate classroom by a certified ESOL teacher. Additionally, students receive 110 minutes of ELA instruction from their classroom teachers during reading and writing workshop daily. Reading Workshop is delivered by the classroom teachers using the ReadyGen curriculum, and writing workshop is delivered by the classroom teachers using the Teachers College Reading and Writing curriculum.Dual Language In the Dual Language program, the targeted language is Spanish. The Dual Language programs is designed to have students spend half of their instructional time with a target language of immersion. The remaining part of the week is spent with English only instruction. In grades one through five, the school uses alternating day model in which language used for content areas alternates from day to day (Monday through Thursdays). Fridays are spent 50 percent in English, and 50 percent in Spanish. In Kindergarten, the model is 80 percent in Spanish and 20 percent in English. ELL students receive integrated and stand-alone ENL during English only days within the classroom when ELLs are grouped together. Within the classroom, bilingual teachers take ELLs aside (during stand-alone instruction) or scaffolds and differentiates ELA instruction (during integrated instruction). ELLs at the entering and emerging levels receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week within the classroom, ELLs at the transitioning and expanding levels receive 180 minutes per week of ENL instruction, and ELLs at the commanding level receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Furthermore, students in the Dual Language program receive ELA instruction for 108 minutes on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays during reading and writing workshop. The bilingual teachers use the ReadyGen curriculum for Reading Workshop, and the teachers use Teachers College Reading and Writing Project for writing workshop. Furthermore, HLA is provided to students in our Dual Language program using the Bi-literacy Pathways curriculum on alternating days. The curriculum provides ELL students with HLA instruction in reading and writing for 108 minutes per day on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays. 7  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Dual Language Program The ELL students equally participate in the literacy, mathematics, and other core curriculum to meet the standards set forth by New York City and the Common Core State Standards. It is imperative that each student have access to coherent instruction that is rigorous and uniformly delivered throughout the school. The instructional approach is designed to support varying levels of instructional work in English and with supports in the student’s native language. This enables the school to service the ELLs in literacy on par with the expectations of monolingual students. Native language support in core subject areas is accessible to ELLs so they can draw on their backgrounds knowledge and experiences for content while continuing to improve their English language acquisition skills. The Dual Language program transfers literacy skills from a child’s home language in Spanish to a child’s second language of English. Students are able to acquire literacy more effectively in the language most familiar to them. Skills used in native language acquisition (e.g., making sense of print, using writing to communicate, playing with language structure, developing vocabulary) are skills that a child uses to foster a more successful acquisition of English literacy. The learners can transfer their dominant language into English to build their understanding of reading strategies, background knowledge about texts, and knowledge of concepts from their native language. Dual Language program is also designed to continue developing students’ native language, as well as English language skills, throughout schooling. In addition, monolingual English students are given the opportunity to learn a second language. Dual Language programs serve both language-minority students in need of English language development and monolingual English-speaking students who are interested in learning a second language. Both groups provide good linguistic role models for each other and, through their interactions language is development in both languages.The Kindergarten classes follow the eighty/twenty model. The daily language of instruction is Spanish with one period designated for ELA instruction. Specials are conducted mostly in English. During the 54-minute period, the students receive additional English language literacy instruction. The two first grade classes follow the sixty/forty model. On Mondays and Wednesdays all subject area instruction is in English. On Tuesday, Thursday, and Friday instruction is in Spanish. During the 54-minute period, the students receive additional English language literacy instruction. The kindergarten and two first grade classes include 50% of students who are English dominant and 50% who are Spanish dominant or bilingual. Students in those classes were interviewed to determine language dominance. Selection was based on the DOE admission policies; parent interest and commitment; as well as the student’s language dominance. The increased amount of Spanish instruction in the kindergarten benefits both linguistic groups of students, as they move through the grades. Additionally, ELLs are able to meet the demands of the NYS Learning Standards through the bilingual teachers’ thoughtful use of the New Language Arts progressions and the Home Language Arts progressions whenever possible. The use of the progressions by bilingual teachers allows ELL students’ access to the standard through the use of grade level texts and a focus on the linguistic demands necessary for ELLs to master the standard. Consequently, our hope is that ELL students are able to meet the grade level academic demands of the Common Core at each of the proficiency levels by providing targeted instruction. Freestanding ENLStudents in freestanding ENL programs receive all instruction in English with native language support. The number of ENL instructional units that a student receives is regulated by New York State CR Part 154 regulations and determined by student English-proficiency levels. The academic content-area in English is supported by the ENL methodology and instructional strategies with native language support to make content comprehensible. The goals for students in the ENL program is for all students to achieve the state-designated level of English proficiency for their grade and to meet or exceed New York State and City Standards. In order to maximize English language acquisition for ELLs, the ENL and classroom teachers work closely to deliver literacy instruction as well as tailor additional content instruction to meet the needs of ELLs. The instruction for the ELLs is aligned to ELA standards and the Targets of Measurement. ELL students are grouped together in general education or Integrated co-teaching classes. It is our goal to encourage integrated instruction for students wherever possible. Where it is not possible to provide integrated instruction, students will be grouped by proficiency level and given instruction to develop their literacy and comprehension skills through a computer generated program, Max Scholar, to assist students in reading comprehension and vocabulary development. The ENL teacher will align instruction to the ReadyGen units of study while using the scaffolding methods of total physical response, small group instruction, visuals, and graphic organizers (among others).The students are grouped together based on their proficiency level on the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT. Additionally, the ENL teacher confers with students individually to ascertain the new vocabulary acquired in the reading program as well as 8  review with students the necessary reading strategies that need to be acquired to answer the reading comprehension questions correctly. Where necessary, the ENL teacher will provide the students with appropriate scaffolding for understanding new words through context clues and reinforce the reading strategies taught in the student's’ class. Students receiving stand-alone instruction in Kindergarten and First grade will receive instruction toward improving English phonological awareness, using the Sounds in Motion program developed by Fran Santore. For integrated ENL services, the ENL teacher coordinates the activities with the classroom teacher. The classroom teacher teaches the mini-lesson and the ENL teacher follows up during the guided practice portion of the lesson by reinforcing the concepts and providing clarification. The ENL teacher differentiates instruction to meet the linguistic and academic needs of individual students by scaffolding concepts using the four language learning modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing. The ENL teacher facilitates ELLs meeting the demands of the NYS Learning Standards by utilizing the New Language Arts progressions and grade level texts. The New Language Arts progressions are used to scaffold and differentiate instruction in the classroom for ELLs at each of the proficiency levels. The CCLS are made accessible to ELLs through thoughtful instruction that allows ELLs accessibility to grade level texts. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? As part of the literacy program, students in the Dual Language program receive reading and writing instruction in both languages simultaneously. In reading and writing, we use the Teachers College Readers workshop and ReadyGen. We augment the workshop with other aspects of balanced literacy. The literacy program provides instruction in all aspects of balanced literacy in both languages including guided reading, shared reading and interactive read aloud. Phonemic awareness and early phonological processing skills are taught in both languages. Fundations is the program PS 163 has adopted for English language instruction. Each classroom has two libraries, which includes various leveled text in both languages. Guided reading is essential for building capacity for reading and guided reading sets are available in both languages. Literacy assessments of running records are conducted in both English and Spanish. Teachers monitor students growing capacity to read and comprehend in both languages. The levels obtained in conducting running records will assist us in providing rigorous guided reading instruction. The PS 163 Dual Language program received a grant from a private organization to purchase non-fiction books in Spanish to supplement our Spanish book closet and the classrooms. These books are used by teachers for guided reading and other small group instruction. We use the Teachers College Writers workshop model and ReadyGen as the basis for writing instruction in both languages. In addition to using the writing units, teachers will teach content area writing skills in both languages. Teachers’ lesson plans also included language objectives. They expect to teach for each unit of study and work on those goals should be visible during each lesson.  Dual Language Classroom Environmental Supports: Charts are color coded for ease of recognition of each language. Word walls and specialized content area word walls are available in both languages. Word study is conducted in both languages. Environmental supports including charts will be designed as references for students. ENL teaching practices and strategies are used during instruction. Rigorous homework will be available in both English and Spanish to reinforce classroom instruction. Math in the Dual Language Classroom: GoMath is taught in both languages in kindergarten through fifth grades. Manipulatives and games support math instruction as they acquire mathematical concepts. Math workshops for parents are conducted in both languages.Science and Social Studies in the Dual Language Classroom:Instruction in science and social studies is delivered using a variety of materials, techniques and field trips take place in both languages. Lab science is taught in English, but classroom teachers support that work in Spanish. In kindergarten, the science (FOSS) and social studies themes are integrated into all areas of the curriculum. For example, teachers select books for the read aloud that are related to the science and social studies themes. Center activities provide the students with additional opportunities to learn science and social studies concepts as well as develop oral academic language. In addition, to whatever extent possible, cluster subjects are scheduled in the language of the day. Our music teacher who does not speak Spanish teaches songs in Spanish. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 9  In order to create and promote the appropriate climate for ELLs to succeed, teachers actively engage, and assess the learning styles of the ELL students to provide the students with differentiated instruction. The ENL teacher, the Dual Language teachers and the Classroom teachers review the scores that the students have obtained on the NYSITELL and the LAB-R as well as sample test to create lesson plans that meet the needs of the students. This is a learning process for the teachers and therefore it is continuously necessary for teachers to collaborate and adjust the content, process, and product in response to the readiness, interests, and learning profiles of their students. In order to be successful members of a rigorous academic environment, the ELLs are given scaffolded instruction to access curriculum. These scaffolds are temporary, and the processes of constructing those scaffolds are removed when the student no longer needs them. The scaffolds used in units of study are placed purposefully to teach specific skills and language. Once students learn these skills and gains linguistic and content knowledge, these scaffolds are no longer needed. Since each child moves along his/her own continuum, and while one child may no longer need the scaffolds, some students may still depend on them. Thus, there is a constant evaluation of the process for the ELL students to assure that scaffolds are used successfully. The scaffolding types used for ELLs are:• Modeling: finished products of prior students’ work, teacher-created samples, sentence starters, writing frameworks, shared writing, etc. • Activating and bridging prior knowledge and/or experiences: using graphic organizers, such as anticipatory guides, extended anticipatory guide, semantic maps, interviews, picture walk discussion protocols, think-pair-share, videos, KWL, etc. • Text representation: transforming a piece of writing into a pictorial representation, changing one genre into another, etc. • Meta-cognitive development: self-assessment, think aloud, asking clarifying questions, using a rubric for self-evaluation, etc. • Contextualization: metaphors, regalia, pictures, audio and video clips, newspapers, magazines, etc. • Building schema: bridging prior knowledge and experience to new concepts and ideas, etc. Our school takes running records for students four times yearly in English and twice yearly in Spanish. Based on those outcomes the students are placed in guided reading or strategy reading groups where they receive necessary small group reading support using ENL strategies to ensure that students understand vocabulary and are making adequate progress in comprehending text. These services are also available in our dual language program. As students become increasingly proficient the extra scaffolds and supports are withdrawn. Extra academic support is available in the form of Max Scholar and the Title III After School Program.PS 163 provides targeted intervention for ELL students in ELA, math and content areas within small groups in classrooms and in after school. Teachers conduct assessments of students in reading and in math throughout the year. Based on these outcomes, teachers provide targeted small group work to help students learn concepts and develop skills. The results of assessments are shared with the ENL teacher so she too may work on specific skills during ENL instruction. a. Describe your instructional plan for SIFE. SIFE students who are Spanish speaking are encouraged to participate in the dual language program. Students also receive academic support through AIS and participate in the after school program. The SIFE students who speak another language other than Spanish are encouraged to participate in the general education program with ENL services. The instructional plan for SIFE students is designed to work with students who are at an early grade reading level in English and/or their native language. The school provides instruction to assist the student’s language, literacy, and content understanding. The ENL teacher works collaboratively with the classroom teacher to support the lesson on developing phonemic awareness and phonic skills using Fundations. Vocabulary development is taught in reading workshop through word study and context clues. Reading comprehension and writing is also taught in the reading and writing workshop to help students develop reading comprehension, fluency, and content knowledge. Writing is taught to expand the students core knowledge and to expand and reinforce literacy. b. Describe your plan for ELLs in US schools less then three years (newcomers). Additionally, because NCLB now requires ELA testing for ELLs after one year, specify your instructional plan for these ELLs. Depending on how much the student has progressed over the year, students may continue learning phonemic and phonological awareness through Fundations and Sounds in Motion. The ENL teacher will continue to support newcomer students in the ENL program with Fundations for reading and writing, read alouds for fluency and listening skills. Fundations and read aloud were also used to help the students develop and improve reading and comprehension skills with the introduction of new word and unfamiliar words. As students progress and start to acquire vocabulary, they are given instruction in reading through guided reading to understand the elements of a story.c. Describe your plan for ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years. Students who are receiving service from the past 4 to 6 years are given ENL instruction in small group instruction through guided reading. The ENL teacher will work with the classroom teacher and review the running records conferences to assess the students’ reading levels and the next steps for the student. The ENL teacher will also assess the students reading knowledge to design the small group instruction to meet the students’ needs in understanding different reading concepts and structures.d. Describe your plan for long-term ELLs (completed 6 years). If a student has been a hold-over in grades K-5, then the school will implement an AIS protocol for the 0  student to receive guided reading instruction in small group work. The student will also be enrolled in after-school for help in mathematical concepts. The student will receive test-preparation for ELA, Math, and the NYSESLAT as well. Our former ELLs, who receive services up to two years after exiting ELL status, receive integrated ENL by the ENL teacher or modified instruction by the bilingual teacher. The ENL teacher works with the classroom teacher to modify instruction by creating a language objective tied to the learning objective. The ENL or Bilingual teachers differentiate instruction for former ELLs by providing students with additional scaffolds and graphic organizers. Former ELLs also receive additional time on examinations in the classroom. The Parent Coordinator will continue to keep the parent/guardian apprised of the intervention so that the parent knows the programs available to the student. The school will support former ELLs by allowing for additional exam time during state tests and after school programs with homework and study skills support. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The components of balanced literacy are used with the entire population to support all areas of language development. Word study involves both word patterns and vocabulary. Shared reading and the reading aloud of higher level books by the teacher supports the students' English language development. Students are exposed to and use vocabulary words that would otherwise be too difficult. Small group instruction in the classroom is targeted to develop the ELL-SWD's English language development. The teachers use text that is instructionally appropriate, guiding the student through the reading and monitoring for understanding. The ENL teacher will align ENL instruction to classroom instruction; however, the teacher will use the scaffolding methods of total physical response, small group instruction, graphic organizers, Thinking Maps, and realia. The ENL teacher will also preview the text by introducing the vocabulary first to the student in core content area. The grade-level materials that teachers use to support ELL-SWDS are Sounds in Motion, Reading Rescue, Reading Recovery, chrome books, computers, Thinking Maps, and manipulatives. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The diverse needs of ELL-SWDs are met in many different ways. Time with the ENL teacher is coordinated with the classroom teacher to best serve the student. Many times the ENL teacher will participate and modify a current lesson in the classroom. At other times, a more direct approach is needed and the ENL teacher will pull the students and work in a small targeted group. Our school uses scheduling flexibility to meet the needs of ELL-SWDs by discussing scheduling with the Special Education or IEP teacher before ENL instruction begins. The teachers collaboratively determine when language instruction would best meet the needs of that particular student, as determined by his or her IEP goals and language acquisition needs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The classroom teacher as well as the ENL teacher, and the Dual Language teachers work with the students in small groups for guided reading during the regular school day and during the Title III After School program. The ELL students will also have the opportunity to participate in the after-school program to develop their math skill and gain a greater understanding of mathematical concepts. A Dual Language teacher in the after-school program will work directly with a group of ELL students. If there is money available, the school will also employ an F-status teacher to work with small groups of student in reading and in math. The F-status teacher will work with ELL learner amongst the group of non-ELL students for both subjects. The F-status teacher will first work with the students in the upper grades in reading and math. After the state-wide tests, the F-status teacher will work with the students in the lower grades. The test preparation books are Ready. A Dual Language teacher will work with the ELL students during an after-school program to ensure that the ENL scaffolding strategies are used to assist the students as well as their native language of Spanish when necessary. ELLs also have the opportunity to participate in Max Scholar where they will work with a small group of students on their listening and speaking, reading, and writing skills using the computer program and guided reading books. The purpose of the computer reading programs are to help the students strengthen the modalities of reading and listening skills. The classroom teachers will use the Max Scholar program to help students strengthen the reading skills in various standards and skill groups that they are struggling with in order to become more proficient over time. Teacher will assess the student’s work to improve the student’s grammar skills and sentence 1  structure through the prompted writing PBAs. This will assist the students in improving their writing skills to gain a proficiency in the writing modality. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the upcoming school year, several improvements will be made to the ELL programming at PS163. In grades K-5, the ENL teacher will be working with classroom teachers to provide language support in the classroom to ELLs. Overall, this will infuse more language support into classroom instruction and will assist the general education teacher in meeting the needs of the ELLs. Furthermore, the ENL teacher will attend more grade level meeting to plan and to infuse more language support into all classroom. Additionally, Max Scholar offers the students the opportunity to read a book at various levels as well as practice reading a book several times to develop fluency and comprehension. It also gives all teachers of the ELL students the opportunity to track and monitor the student’ progress and comprehension level to customize the reading program for struggling readers to accelerate the students’ learning by introducing more difficult text. It can be used in school as well as at home. In addition, the school is in its third full-year of Senderos, a common core aligned reading and writing program. Teachers are working to align and implement units to provide standards-based Spanish instruction. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? PS163 still currently has a Dual Language program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students are provided with the same instructional and enrichment opportunities offered to all students. The integrated instruction allows the students the opportunity to participate in the mini-lesson conducted by the teacher and then receive additional support by the ENL teacher. In the dual language program, the dual language teacher provides small group support that the ELL students require using ENL methods to improve their understanding of content. ELL students participate in all enrichment clusters in grades 3 through 5 and arts enrichment activities throughout the grades to develop linguistic and social skills. When teaching social studies and science content, teachers in both general education classes and dual language classes are aware of the need to focus on clarifying vocabulary, repeating instructions and using visual supports to promote learning for all students but particularly for ELL students. ELL students have opportunities to attend Max Scholar in the mornings, which is a computer-based reading intervention program. Additionally, ELL students have the opportunity to attend the Title III after school enrichment program where they receive targeted instruction in reading, writing, listening, and speaking. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The Instructional material that the will be used to support the ELLs are Senderos, Ready, ReadyGen, Reader’s Theater, and series of guided reading books from the bookroom. All students will use the social studies curriculum core books from the NYC DOE. The upper grades will use social studies curriculum in Independent Investigation Method writing research papers and presenting oral presentations. The technology support for the ELLs is through Max Scholar, and Science/Computer class that focuses on learning science concepts and vocabulary on-line. The upper and lower grades will also use Max Scholar to work on reading concepts to increase their proficiency levels. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? All ELL students receive instruction based on their diverse student profiles. There are ELLs who may be gifted and there are many with a high level of proficiency in their native language. Others may not be able to read or write their native language, because they have had a limited or interrupted formal education in their own country. Finally, there is a population of ELL students who have been identified as having special needs and have been referred for special education services. The focus of instruction for ENL and DL students is to develop academic English language vocabulary, concepts, and communication skills. ELL students who are part of either the receiving service 4 to 6 years or Long Term ELLs subgroups are also provided with additional small group instruction; when available we address the particular needs of ELL students in our after school program. ELL students receive small group instruction both from our ENL teacher and from a DL teacher. Students work on either literacy concepts or intense work on math skills. The ELLs are placed with a Dual Language teacher who will offer instruction in their Native Language of Spanish were necessary. Native Language support will also be given to the Spanish speaking students in Dual Language by teaching science in Spanish a one day a week from a cluster teacher. This will allow the students in the 2  lower grades of Kindergarten to second grade to develop knowledge and understanding of tier three vocabulary words. The programs will consist of read alouds to obtain an understanding of science concepts necessary to complete hand-on science experiments in groups, pair, and/or individually. In the ENL program, entering and emerging Spanish-speaking ELLs have the opportunity to read Spanish texts in bilingual libraries. Additionally, ELL students in the ENL program have the option to use bilingual dictionaries to further support their language development. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL Teacher, Dual Language Teachers and Classroom Teachers use student performance data from multiple assessments within program to plan instruction, and differentiate learning and teaching, to meet the needs of each ELL student. The teachers use running records from Fountas and Pinnell and Common Core State Standards for reading instruction to assist students in language acquisition, vocabulary development, and reading comprehension strategies to continue the goal of reaching their grade level appropriate reading level. Max Scholar assessment is used for upper grade students to help students understand the questions used to assess students’ understanding of various reading strategies. The teachers also use Common Core State Standards, Teacher’s College, and ReadyGen for instruction in writing, and prompted writing performance based assessment to assist students in developing their writing skills in English. The focus of instruction for higher need students is to develop academic English language vocabulary, concepts, and communication skills. In addition, ELL students participate in our after school remedial programs when available and in language development groups for younger students. The program focuses on building upon the students’ language and vocabulary development. The upper grade students are also invited to an after-school program when available that focuses on math development of understanding concepts and explaining their rationale for how they solved mathematical problems. The ELL students are grouped together with a Dual Language teacher to assist teaching mathematical concepts in their Native Language of Spanish were necessary. In the advent a student cannot participate in an after-school program the classroom teacher or the ENL teacher will provide the students with small group instruction during the regular school day. All required services/resources are grade and age appropriate by utilizing students' Fountas and Pinnell levels that are available on the school's Google Drive. Additionally, the ENL teacher and bilingual teachers use the online programs Learning A-Z and Newsela, among others. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? PS163 The Alfred E. Smith School is not collocated. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? PS 163 is an elementary school and at this time the only language elective is Italy that is offered to the students in the upper grades as a club. The students in the school as well as the ELLs can chose the Italy club for one semester in grades 3-5. The club is for 55 minutes once a week. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a.) The PS 163 Dual Language program uses the self-contained model throughout the grades. Teachers are responsible for one group of students and provide all instruction in the two languages according to grade specific language allocation policy. Kindergarten students follow the 80/20 language allocation model and in grades first through fourth, the 50/50 model is followed. This model was chosen because there has not been a large enough population to sustain two classes per grade to have a side-by-side 3  model. b. The PS 163 Dual Language separates language for instruction by day- Tuesday and Thursday in Spanish, Monday and Wednesday in English and either alternating Fridays in Spanish or Half-day English/Spanish Fridays-in grades first through fourth. In Kindergarten, Spanish is used daily for all instruction with the exception of one ELA period and specialty classes (art, music, gym).c. English language instruction occurs during a specific daily ELA period. The focus of the ELA period is the development of English literacy. To achieve this goal, the teachers utilized Read Alouds, Shared Reading, Interactive Writing, and Fundations. The English language is also used during most of the specialty periods such as art, music, gym and science. The language allocation for the kindergarten class was changed several years ago from 50/50 to 80/20 because the school felt that both EPs and ELLS would benefit from having more Spanish in the kindergarten. The ELLs would have the benefit from building on their home language. The EPs would also benefit by building a greater vocabulary. Since we implemented this change, most of the kindergarten students have met the end of the year grade level benchmarks in both English and Spanish. In grades first through fourth, the language allocation is 50/50 for both EPs and ELLs. On Tuesdays and Thursdays in all classes instruction is in Spanish. On Mondays and Wednesdays all classroom instruction is in English. To achieve the 50/50, teachers have the options to conduct every other Friday in Spanish or to divide all Fridays into half day Spanish and half day English. Most of the specialties are conducted in English.d. Emergent literacy is taught simultaneously. The administration, staff, and parents are comfortable with having the students learn to read in both languages at the same time. The classrooms are organized to support literacy in the two languages. Separate libraries are provided for each of the languages as are charts and other printed materials. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? There are a number of professional development opportunities at PS 163 for personnel who work with our ELL students.Teachers work in grade level teams to develop curriculum and create adaptations to meet the needs of English Language Learners. In addition, teachers meet on Monday afternoons during extended day where they are studying the new Common Core Standards and refining existing units of study and developing the new units of study required by the Department of Education in English language arts and math. Teachers of ELL students participate in these planning sessions and identify the approaches that are needed to adapt and modify the units of study so that ELL students can receive rigorous instruction, and understand underlying concepts that are the heart of each unit of study. Such modifications include a focus on vocabulary, pre-teaching concepts, use of visual aids, small group instruction. Teachers of ELLs are offered the following professional development (PD) opportunities to support ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards: two school wide PD days prior to the start of the school year specifically targeting the implementation of ReadyGen, the Citywide Instructional Expectations, and implementation on the ELA instructional shifts; weekly Monday afternoon extended day professional development (facilitated by the school's administration) on the implementation of the Common Core Learning Standards; opportunities to join any bi-weekly grade level meetings where topics include: alignment of ELA curriculum to best support our students while meeting the needs of our students with disabilities and English Language Learners; school wide Election Day PD; and school wide Chancellor's Day PD. In addition, our ENL teacher attends the Manhattan Field Support Center Workshop for ELL Leads for Districts 3 and 4 bi-monthly and shares information and strategies obtained with teachers of ELLs. Furthermore, all teachers receive professional development on improving academic language in the classroom through our school's Learning Partners Program. Lead teachers involved in this program provides professional development to the staff on collaborative conversation and improving academic discourse in the classroom. 4  PS163 will devote 15 percent of the allotted professional development time to ELL-specific topics. The first professional development will be on ways to incorporate ELL appropriate scaffolds into daily lessons. This professional development will take place during Monday's professional development time on October 16th. The second, third, and fourth professional developments will be on using Thinking Maps for English Language Learners. These professional developments are planned to take place on November 13th, December 4th, and December 18th. The ENL teacher will be the facilitator of the three pre-scheduled professional developments. The next ELL-specific professional developments will be scheduled on an ongoing basis. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The dual language program designed and distributed a comprehensive second language progress report which will provide parents with information about their children’s development in their second language, specifically in the areas of listening comprehension, speaking, vocabulary, grammar, and spelling. The ENL and Bilingual teachers also host a parent information session on the NYSESLAT. During this parent information session, parents are informed of the dates of the upcoming exams and gain familiarity with the four sections that their children will encounter on the upcoming exam. Parents are also invited every week to discuss their children's language development needs during Tuesday parent outreach time. Finally, ENL and Bilingual teachers frequently contact parents individually by phone to discuss language development progress, using the DOE Office of Translation services when necessary. Parents can also schedule in-person one-on-one meetings with ENL and bilingual teachers on an ongoing basis through the use of our parent coordinator. If the parent is unable to meet in-person, phone meeting can be scheduled. A record of the in-person or phone meetings will be kept in a log in the ELL compliance binder. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Since about half of our school population is Spanish- dominant and many of these families are ELLs, we make sure that there is always a translator on hand to provide simultaneous translation to our Spanish speakers. For social events, our primary focus is to make all families feel welcome and included. To involve our Spanish-dominant families and show respect for their Latino heritage, we have two events that highlight the Spanish language and culture - "Dia de los Muertos" (Day of the Dead Halloween Party) and "Noche de Amor" (Night of Love Valentine's party). While these events have a Spanish focus, all families at our school, regardless of their background and language, feel welcome and have a great time. We have found that cultural pride is a wonderful way to involve parents. We actively solicit parent suggestions and requests when designing services, workshops and events. The first parent engagement activity will take place during Tuesday's parent engagement time on October 17th. The focus will be on ways to support children’s English language development at home. 5  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: Our ENL and Dual Language programs aims to support students’ language acquisition through careful collaboration. Teachers, administrators, and parents work together to meet the diverse needs of students. Through the careful use of data to monitor student progress, it is our goal that students will move towards English language proficiency. 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Donny Lopez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Alfred E. Smith School School DBN: 03M163 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Donny Lopez Title Principal Andrea Woodhouse-Spence Assistant Principal n/a Parent Coordinator Tiffany Opong ENL/Bilingual Teacher Agnes Zakrzewska Parent Natalie Roussel Teacher/Subject Area Kelly Aherne Teacher/Subject Area n/a n/a Coach Coach Jennifer Smullian School Counselor Ilene Altschul Fanny Castro Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/3/17 10/3/17 1/1/01 10/3/17 10/3/17 10/3/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/3/17 10/3/17 10/3/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 03M163 School Name: Alfred E. Smith Superintendent: Ilene Altschul The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Walkiria Santana Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Within a short time period from registration and first attend date to the school the Pupil Personnel Secretary determines the primary language of the parent/guardian for the student. The primary language is determined by the information placed on the emergency card and the Home Language Identification Survey. Then the primary language is then entered into ATS. If it is determined that the primary language is not English, then all contacts to the parents are sent home in both languages of Spanish and English. If the parent needs language assistance to communicate effectively with the staff members of the school the Parent Coordinator who speaks Spanish is present at meeting with the parent as a representative. If the parent’s primary language is Haitian, the ENL teacher who speaks Haitian represents the parent in all meeting with the school staff. If the parent needs the notices sent home by the school translated into a language other than Spanish, the ENL teacher will set up an appointment with the parent to speak with a representative from the Translation Department in the DOE. The ENL teacher will provide interpretation services over the phone during regular business hours to parents who primary language is a covered language stated above and for those who request services in order to communicate with the DOE regarding critical information about their child’s education. 9  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral FRENCH HEBREW INDONESIAN (AKA BAHASA) JAPANESE ENGLISH RUSSIAN SPANISH URDU 1 1 0 0 500 0 62 0 0.18 0.18 0 0 88.65 0 10.99 0 1 1 1 1 495 1 63 1 0.18 0.18 0.18 0.18 87.77 0.18 11.17 0.18 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 0  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to The school makes important documents readily available in Spanish and English, the two primary languages spoken by families at the school. In the case that additional translation is needed P.S. 163 utilizes the DOE Translation services to provide documents in Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, and Urdu. These translations provide access to all of the families being served at the school. Each year the school translates the Family Handbook (September 2015) in both English and Spanish. This documents important updates in the school such as changes in dismissal procedures and behavior/discipline policies. A monthly school calendar is provided for families in English and Spanish. The calendar indicates important dates such as upcoming PTA meetings, school holidays, and student performances). This letter provides families with the opportunity to sign up for a meeting time that best fits their schedules. The LEAP After-School program releases a monthly letter in English and Spanish to note upcoming events, like the LEAP talent show, and days the program will not be open, for instance early dismissal days. The Parent Coordinator works in conjunction with the PTA and the school administration to plan monthly Café 163 - School-wide Information Sessions. These sessions are advertised in both English and Spanish. Topics vary from Common Core Learning Standards, school curriculum, resources for ELL families, etc. Families Families are also notified in both English and Spanish about upcoming Parent-Teacher Conferences (9/17, 11/4, 3/2, 5/12). translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The Parent Coordinator, the ENL Coordinator, and the Language Access Coordinator work to ensure that documents are critical documents are translated in a timely manner for Limited English Proficient Families. The Language Translation Interpretation Unit is utilized for languages that are not dominant in our school building. PS163 a structure that ensures that one week prior to a document being sent our to families that all families that need 1  translation are accounted for. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings The school participates in the NYCDOE parent-teacher conference dates (9/17, 11/4, 3/2, 5/12). These conferences are formal meetings between families and their children's teachers to provide concrete feedback on student performance and provide families with strategies for academic, emotional, and behavioral support. Monthly PTA meetings are open sessions to all families and staff at P.S. 163. These meetings are used to discuss upcoming school-wide events, such as the Día De Los Muertos celebration, budgetary and grant requests and develop a collaborative school culture. Parents work alongside teaching staff to plan the 5th Grade Graduation. The first meeting was September 2017 to organize a committee and delegate tasks for the upcoming event. This September, a middle school matriculation meeting was hosted in both English and Spanish to provide information about different middle school options and the application process. The guidance counselor and teaching staff meet with families throughout the year to assist in portfolio creation, prepare for interviews, and find the best middle school match for the students. Teaching staff also maintains an establish Family Outreach time (Tuesdays from 2:40 - 3:30) to meet with families to discuss students' progress. The school is in constant communication to relay information regarding students academic and behavioral performances. If a family speaks a language other Spanish, school staff members are trained in the use of the Translation and Interpretation Unit. In addition, for major events, such as Parent-Teacher Conferences, the school will use funds allocated to hire interpreters for immigrant families who speak a language other than Spanish. Pertinent documents are translated in a timely manner for Open School Week, which takes place November 13th through November 17th. Additionally, translators are provided for Parent Teacher Conference Nights, which take place on November 16th, March 15th, and May 23rd. How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? The Parent Coordinator, the ENLCoordinator, and the Language Access Coordinator work to ensure that interpreters are available for Limited English Proficient families. The Language Translation Interpretation Unit is utilized for languages that are not dominant in our school building. PS163 a structure that ensures that one week prior to conferences and the open school week interpreters are accounted for. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2  In the event of an emergency, our Language Access Coordinator as well as the parent coordinator and administration will be responsible for relaying the information as quickly as possible. Parents will be contacted by phone and with a letter home In the parents preferred language. In addition, the school’s Building Response Team has bilingual professionals trained in an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. PS163 ensures that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663. The Language Access Coordinator is trained to disseminate pertinent information to ELL families. Interpreters are provided for all school function, using the allotted translation and interpretation funds. Moreover, the school staff is knowledgeable about the requires for provided interpretation for Limited English Proficient families. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who requires language assistance services will receive a copy of the Bill of Parental Rights and Responsibilities. Written and oral interpretation services will be provided at curriculum nights, PTA meetings, workshops, parent meetings, and parent/teacher conferences. When needed in Spanish, staff and family members volunteer to translate into Spanish. When the school does not have this convenient access to the languages needed for translation, the parent coordinator contacts the DOE to apply for interpreters. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 3  The families are provided with formal and informal means of giving feedback on the quality and availability of services. Twice a year provide families with a survey generated from the office of the parent coordinator. This feedback gives a space for anonymous feedback and constructive criticism. The Learning Environment Survey (LES) as a tool to gather parental feedback on the quality and availability of services. In addition, the administration and office staff maintain and open door policy which extends an open invitation for families to discuss their questions and concerns. The School Leadership Team serves as a platform for elected and unelected members to voice their ideas and feedback about school-wide topics, including the quality and availability of services. 4 
