 03M166 School Name: P.S. 166 THE RICHARD RODGERS SCHOOL OF THE ARTS AND TECHNOLOGY Principal: DEBRA MASTRIANO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: P.S.166 BEDS Code: 10300010166 Grades Served: Grades K-5 School Number (DBN): 03M166 School Address: 132 West 89th Street N.Y.C., N.Y. 10024 Phone Number: 212-678-2829 Fax: 212-579-4542 School Contact Person: Debra Mastriano Email Address: dmastriano@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: District 3 Superintendent’s Office Address: Debra Mastriano James Fama Moira JaffeSolomon, Monica Gelinas Jennifer Jin, Stephanie Stern N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Ilene Altschul Superintendent: 154 West 93rd Street Room 122 ialtsch@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-678-5857 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: (212) 222-7816 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Avenue 8 th Floor Executive Director’s Office Address:   YChut@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: (646) 470-0721 Fax: (212) 356-7564   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Debra Mastriano James Fama Moira Jaffe-Solomon Jennifer Gibbs Madelyn Storms JohnLussier Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jennifer Jin Kristin Savov Rachelle King Stephanie Stern Kelly Ruffler Julie Stone Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 166 provides a nurturing environment committed to achieving academic excellence, celebrating diversity, and fostering a climate of respectfulness and trust. Students, parents, and staff work together to establish an environment of equity, acceptance and growth where everyone learns and each person counts. Students are encouraged to achieve to their best ability intellectually, socially, and emotionally. Teachers work collaboratively to reflect on best teaching practices and the common core standards ensuring that all learning needs and styles are met. Professional development and ongoing learning ensure that rigor, purpose and engagement are consistently achieved. Students are provided real world experiences and hands on involvement that allows them to deepen their understanding of the   world around them. PS 166 supports innovations in the arts as well as the latest technology to insure preparedness of all students for the years ahead. We are a community that encourages all members to become confident self-motivated lifelong learners. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. At PS166 we strive for high standards in all subject areas. We are committed to meeting the needs of all students each and every day through data-driven instruction and goal-setting for all students. We aim to develop college- and career-ready scholars. We achieve this through rigorous and standards-based instruction, reflective practice, and inquiry. Teachers provide students with the necessary supports and scaffolds needed to be successful in the classroom and beyond. At our school, students and staff approach each day with a growth mindset and with a “work hard, get smart” attitude, eager to learn and grow. We hold our students and ourselves to high standards of accountability — always remembering that our efforts have a profound effect on the lives of our children. We provide rigorous instruction aligned to the Common Core Standards and a supportive environment through the integration of RULER, a social emotional program that enhances our social emotional culture and the child mind institute that supports teachers, students and families. As a Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project school, we ensure that we are meeting Common Core Learning Standards across all grades, and that students are reading and writing in a range of genres. Our teachers engage in data-driven instruction that targets students’ specific strengths and growth areas. Our TCRWP coaches provide staff development in the areas of reading and writing workshop. In Math, teachers are provided with bi-weekly staff development to grow their conceptual understanding of the Common Core Math Standards and Common Core Shifts through K-5 number talks, math rotations, and ECAM/Screener centers. In addition, our math consultant works with teachers to review unit assessments to guide differentiated instruction and best mathematical practices. All of our coaches work to ensure vertical alignment among grades. All grades engage in a multitude of data sources such as Grade K-5 Running Records, writing on Demand, K-2 Fundations, Grades K-2 Early Childhood Assessment of Mathematics (ECAM data)/ Grade 3-5 /Screener math data, formative assessments and inquiry cycles to ensure a thorough data-driven curriculum. On Mondays during our Professional Learning Cycles, teachers engage in inquiry with grade-level teams. Our teachers work weekly in inquiry and learning teams, wherein teachers collaborate to look at student data or use professional books to make informed instructional decisions. Grade Level Teacher Leaders facilitate professional learning experiences for their colleagues centered on our school-wide instructional focus and goals. Assessments occur throughout each unit and students and teachers assess the work to determine next steps for progress. Each classroom's curriculum is rigorous, meets the standards, is differentiated and modified to meet the needs of all students. Students explore, question and collaborate in order to become lifelong learners and global citizens. Children are aware of their strengths and goals, which are determined in partnership with the students and the teachers in a purposeful manner. Students feel empowered to state their opinions, question each other and articulate thoughts and ideas through actionable feedback. Administration has a high level of respect for professionals in the building. Administration looks out for the personal welfare of all staff ensuring that we function as a cohesive unit to run the school effectively. We have effectively done this by creating a school-wide social-emotional charter based on the RULER program, a research-based program started at Yale, with the goals of recognizing, understanding, and expressing emotions effectively. We are also 0  establishing a partnership with Child Mind Institute to support behavior management strategies into the classroom so that all teachers feel supported and given the tools. The principal communicates a clear vision of growing a community that works towards teaching, reflecting and revising curriculum by providing RTI I, II and III strategies to meet the needs of all students including ELLs and SWDs. The Principal's vision is demonstrated through participation in staff development with coaches, providing professional development opportunities for every staff member. The principal also provides opportunities for collaborative teacher team meetings where the focus is data-driven instruction, thus providing many opportunities for teacher leadership. The principal offers transparency through sharing data, the CEP and professional turn-key documents. Teachers make decisions based on their students' needs, utilizing the curriculum as well as their own expertise to modify lessons. Professional development is created based on the needs of the teachers as well as the shared goals of the school. Administration leads by example and are open to suggestions and feedback from all members of the community, including students. All school staff, including the administration, participates in professional development within a culture of continuous growth. The principal leads by example by nurturing the professional growth of teachers and staff by providing opportunities for continuous professional development as well as developing and delivering the instructional emotional-support that drives achievement. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Every grade has an ICT class with a general education and special education teacher. Every grade also has two G&T classes with a G&T licensed teacher. Over 50% of the students are G&T or special needs. Special needs students include students with learning disabilities, speech and language impairments, and other health impairments. The students are supported by a staff of specialists including speech, occupational, SETTS, and physical therapists. Our guidance counselor and SBST teams work closely with teachers and related service providers to ensure students’ social and emotional needs are met. In addition, every general education classroom also has students with IEPs who are supported by key personnel. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to the Framework for Great Schools we continue to grow in the areas of Rigorous Instruction and Strong Family Ties. One key area of focus is for the principal to lead by example communicating expectations with staff, nurturing the professional growth of teachers and staff, and developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. We will continue our inquiry practice to progress monitor students in order to target specific goals in instruction and ensure student growth. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M166 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 648 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 24 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 16 14 24 24 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 20.0% % Attendance Rate 17.1% % Reduced Lunch 2.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 16.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 57.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.09 0% 27% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 86.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 95% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 71 70 24 95.9% 2.6% 10.8% 5.2% 12.0% 9.4% 2 5% 5.1 87.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: In the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide Survey PS166 received a strong rigorous instructional score of 3.95 out of 5.00. Although, the score is high it went down .49 points compared to 2016-2017 (4.44). Next Steps: In an attempt to increase rigorous instruction we will provide focus on providing a variety of professional development activities to support small group instruction, differentiation, and conferring. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through ongoing data analysis and curriculum planning we will work to increase rigorous instruction from 3.95 to 4.45. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monthly professional development will be provided for teaching assistants and teachers that are new and new to the grade. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers, Teaching Assistants, Student Teachers. Ongoing September 2018- June 2019 Administration Model Teachers Coaches Inter-visitations with other schools in Manhattan, such as PS6, as well as visitation with PS166 model teachers will support professional growth and strengthen instruction. Grade leaders will serve as liaisons for communication and decision making between administration, teachers, and support staff. Teachers, Teaching Assistants, Student Teachers Teachers, Teaching Assistants, Student Teachers Coaches will work with staff to review and revise curriculum to differentiate instruction in order to meet the needs of all students. Teachers, Students Model Teachers, Administration, PS6 Teachers Grade Level Teams, Administration, Professional Learning Committee Members All Teachers, Mentor Teachers, Administration, Coaches Ongoing September 2018- June 2019 Monthly meetings September 2018- June 2019 Math Ongoing Tuesdays and TCRWP coaches 10x's per year, September 2018- June 2019 Administration will evaluate teachers using the Danielson Framework with a focus on 1a Teacher Pedagogy and will support teachers with intervisitations to increase teacher efficacy. All Teachers, Administration All Teachers Ongoing, two observations will be completed by January 4 In an attempt to increase rigorous instruction we will provide monthly professional development for para professionals and teaching assistants in order to build capacity. All TA's and Sp Ed 2018- June 2019 Monthly Peer intervistations within the school will enable staff to acquire techniques, learn from colleagues, analyze strategies, and develop a culture of learning. All Teachers November 2018- June 2019 All TA's / Para Professionals/ Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be introduced to the curriculum during PALP's (Parents as Learning Partners) where parents participate in the classroom in different curriculum areas (math, reading, writing) with their children in November, January and March. Teachers and administrators will also provide parents with workshops in Math, ELA, and Testing. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The PTA budget supports funding for coaches, consultants, and workshops. Professional Learning Committees and grade leader planning meetings will be scheduled to support further teacher professional development. Additional materials to support units and curriculum will be purchased for classroom teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, we will progress monitor with Danielson 1a Teacher Pedagogy to assess if rigorous instruction is being implemented in the classrooms and to achieve Effective/Highly Effective in 90% of classes. We will also progress monitor grade leader meeting notes to ensure grade leaders are communicating information to school staff. By March 2019, we will ensure 75% of staff have participated in intervisitations and/or monthly professional development. We will also send out a parent survey to progress monitor our rigorous instructional score and ensure that we meet our goal by June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The Danielson data, surveys, pre-/post-assessment data, meeting notes, and Professional Development notes. 5  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strength: In 2016 the RULER program was implemented to help create an environment to provide students with the tools to manage and regulate emotions helping us to receive a supportive environment score of 3.22 from the 2016-2017 school quality survey. Next Steps: Although RULER was implemented, we have the potential to create a more supportive environment by providing teachers with strategies to build intrinsic motivation within students allowing them to participate in positive ways as members of a larger community. Responsive Classroom morning meeting and the Child Mind Institute will support teachers and students even further by providing a shared language to communicate expectations within and across grades and across the entire school, creating and sustaining a school environment that maximizes academic and social emotional behavior outcomes. Incorporating a motto, "be kind, be safe, be responsible," students discuss what a positive environment looks like throughout our school--in the yard, cafeteria, classroom, hallway, bathroom, etc. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of staff will implement RULER practices in the classroom (Recognizing emotions in self and others, Understanding the cause and consequences of emotions; Labeling emotions accurately, Expressing emotions appropriately, Regulating emotions effectively) and incorporate the morning meeting as well as strategies from Child Mind Institute as evidenced by report card scores in behavior as evidenced of 85% of Grade 3 will receive Level 3 or Higher. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development for all staff around RULER program, outline the four components of Phase 1 (The Charter, The Mood Meter, The Meta-Moment and the Blueprint). All staff Social and Emotional Committee/ Ongoing Administration/ AIS Team September 2018-June 2019 Student videos will be presented at assemblies to explain the expectation All staff and students Ongoing October 2018- AIS Team/ Social Emotional Committee/Teachers/Administration /Guidance Counselor/Social Worker of be safe, be kind, be responsible. June 2019 (October, December, February) Providing equity and access for all committee will ensure that the social emotional goals set by RULER, Morning Meeting, Child Mind Institute are equitable and accessible to all students. All students On going Monthly Meetings AIS Team/ SE Committee/ Teachers/ Administration/ Guidance Counselor/ Social Worker and EQUITY Committee September 2018- June 2019 All Classrooms will have the four anchor charts: the charter, mood meter, meta-moment and blueprint charts. All Classrooms/ Staff Ongoing -September- June 2019 Guidance Counselor, Social Emotional Team, Administration, Teachers All Classrooms will include using strategies from Ruler and Morning Meeting embedded in the curriculum in assemblies. All Classrooms/ Staff Ongoing -September- June 2019 Guidance Counselor, Social Emotional Team, Administration, Teachers All Classrooms will promote positive thinking strategies to grow confidence academically and personally. All Classrooms/ Staff Ongoing -September- June 2019 Guidance Counselor, Social Emotional Team, Administration, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 8  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Guidance Counselor and Social Worker will provide 4 parent workshops on the School's Social Emotional RULER program over the 2018-2019 school year. The workshops will give parents an overview of the school program as well as the tools needed to implement components of the program at home. The Child Mind Institute will provide a series of workshops on effective behavior management strategies for parents. The presentation will provide parents with opportunities to ask questions regarding the various situations where they typically encounter behavioral issues. This talk will guide discussion of how effective behavior management strategies can be applied from preschool through high school, ultimately helping parents to build and maintain healthy and positive parent-child relationships across all ages. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The PTA is funding Child Mind Institute and the school purchased the Morning Meeting book, and the RULER tools for all classrooms. Planning meetings will be scheduled to support professional development in all of these areas. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In November 2018 and February 2019 behavior grades as indicated on report cards will be compared with behavior grades from June 2018 in Grade 3 there will be a 20% increase. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Academic Behavior Grades Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS166's, 2017-2018 the School Quality Guide indicates a Collaborative Teaching Score of 3.42 which is higher than the previous year (2017- 3.28) but, lower than 2016 a score of 3.62. This indicates that we are on an upward swing but have to improve this score to exceed expectations. In the past year the staff has been able to collect shared documents on the Google Team Drive so that our collaborative efforts are memorialized in documents that are easily accessible to all colleagues. Next steps, this year we are streamlining the process for data collection and entry by creating a school wide data collection to support access to inf0rmation and support student growth through progress monitoring. This will allow grade teams and support staff to work together to respond to the data and plan instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase teacher collaboration through the strengthening of the school’s professional development plan as measured by increase in peer collaboration on the NYC school survey from 61% to 66%. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Providing Staff Development on the Google Drive and collecting assessment data to streamline progress monitoring of students. All Staff, Sept- Administration The sharing of information will allow us to more effectively collaborate and progress monitor, differentiate, revise instruction and make sharing of knowledge more accessible for all to provide access and equity of curriculum for all students. Administration and Check- ins thorough out the year Technology Team, and Grade Level Leaders, and Coaches 2019 All Assessment Data will be an Excel Document on the Drive and inputted monthly by staff members and analyzed by all teachers and AIS personal. All Staff, Administration Quarterly Sept-June 2019 Staff survey will be conducted to determine if collaborative communication has increased. All Staff Survey Sept-June 2019 Administration, AIS, Grade Level Leaders and All Teachers Teachers, Administration and SLT The professional learning committee will include multiple formats during Professional Learning time within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. on Monday including peer turn key. Teachers will continue to meet in grade wide small groups to collaborate on the development of teaching tools, to set goals for student growth, to track student progress, and to discuss differentiation strategies within the curriculum to address the needs of all students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Staff Sept- June 2019 Teachers, Administration All Staff, Administration Sept- June 2019 Teachers, Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be communicated about all progress before each marking period. (October, December, February, April) 1  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development provided during coaching, PD, after school, prep periods, and Saturdays. Per- session will be given as needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019 staff will complete a school base survey on peer collaboration and professional learning with 75% positive responses. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey., Google Drive updates, coaches and grade leader check ins. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS166's, 2017-2018 the School Quality Guide indicates an Effective School Leadership Score of 3.38, which is higher than the previous year (2017- 2.38). This indicates that we are on an upward swing but have to improve this score to exceed expectations. We received a score of 73% in Instructional Leadership on the School Quality Guide, and this seems to be an area where we can improve. The school administration is involved in curriculum and instruction, working with staff and coaches to support curriculum development in all grades. Teachers are supported with materials, professional development and in-house mentoring opportunities (i.e. intervisitation) so they can grow their pedagogy. While teachers are supported in their instruction, there was not a central forum for administrators and faculty to refine and implement new ideas. This year we will establish a Grade Leader Committee as a forum where administration and teacher leaders can come together to convey a clear vision for the school, discuss the instructional and social emotional supports teachers need to be effective, maintain open lines of communication regarding issues and concerns as they arise in classrooms, adapt and problem-solve to overcome obstacles, and work as a cohesive team to implement collaborative ideas for improvement aligned to the school’s vision. The Grade Leader Committee will be gather input from staff through surveys that can be used to drive decision making regarding improvements. The committee will ensure ideas have been vetted, communicated, shared, and implemented by all members in a timely manner. We believe by establishing this committee we will increase the score in Effective School Leadership and ultimately the Trust score. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Grade Leader Committee will oversee identification and implementation of tactical improvements in the school. The committee will meet on a monthly basis to communicate and consider initiatives and follow through with all current and new ideas for improvement. By implementing these collegial practices we will increase the Effective School Leadership score from 3.38 to 3.45. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Establish a Grade Leader Committee of teachers and administrators that will meet on a regular basis (once a month) to serve as a forum for gathering and evaluating information, collaborating on ideas and solutions, communicating with grade teams, and implementing tactical improvements through out the school. All Staff Grade Leader Committee will put together a surveys to gather information from staff and use this input to create and pursue initiatives and address concerns at grade team meetings and staff meetings. All Staff Grade Level Teams will share the school vision with their grade teams and make revisions. Grade Teams/ Grade Level Teams will share and make revisions to the school mission statement and collaborative with vertical grade level leaders on the final statement. Grade Level Leaders will share to the whole staff the vision and mission of the school. Leaders Grade Teams/ Leaders Grade Leaders On-going, October 2018-June 2019 Grade Leader Teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator , Guidance Councilor On-going, October 2018-June 2019 November 2018- December 2018 November 2018- December 2018 November 2018 Grade Leader Teachers, Administration, Parent Coordinator , Guidance Councilor Grade Leader Teachers/ Administration Grade Leader Teachers/ Administration Grade Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents have opportunities to serve in leadership roles as part of the PTA and the SLT. The Principal engages with parents during grade-level coffee talks to discuss issues and initiatives at the school. In addition, all initiatives will be shared with parents through newsletters, workshops, PTA President emails and PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 4  School Budget- per-session will be given as needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 a survey will be sent out to assess the effectiveness of the Grade Leader Committee with 80% staff satisfaction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey results will be evaluated and shared with school faculty. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS166 is a Collaborative School that achieved a strong family and community ties score of 4.07 in the 2018 School Quality Guide. Families meet with administration and staff to discuss curriculum, concerns, and initiatives twice a year twice a year with each grade level during coffee with the principal. Parents are provided with a variety of teacher-led workshops during PTA meetings that offer a clear understanding of curricular goals. Throughout the year, parents volunteer for a variety of fundraising activities such as Fall Fest, Movie Night, the Dance Party, Auction, and the Book Fair, to name a few. Parents also are invited to participate in publishing parties, field trips, and special events in the classroom as well as attend annual student performances, art shows, and a science fair. Administration collaborates with the PTA and meets regularly with the PTA presidents to gain parent feedback Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS166 will increase its strong family and community ties score from 4.07 to 4.40 by incorporating more opportunities for parents as learning partners, (PALP), in the classroom where parents will participate in reading, writing, and math curricula’s. This will allow parents to see the curriculum in action in the classroom. We will evaluate the effectiveness of PALPs by providing parents with an online survey after each session. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents All classrooms will host 3 PALP events (one in math, one in the writing process, and one in reading workshop) where parents are invited into the classroom to participate in these curricula. Parents will receive an online survey soliciting feedback following every PALP. Data will be collected via the parent surveys by the Parent Coordinator and SLT members, and will be used to assess the quality and effectiveness of each PALP. Parents Administration, Teachers, Students, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Administration, Parent Coordinator November 2018, January 2019, March 2019. November 2018, January 2019, March 2019. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Child Mind Institute, K-5 Math Teaching Resources, Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, the Children’s Museum of the Arts, The Metropolitan Opera, and the West Side Community Garden Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Budget, Per Session, PTA Funded Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 7  In January a school online survey will be sent to parents regarding feedback from the PALP (Parents as Learning Partners) with 85% satisfaction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In November, January, and March, following each PALP, an online survey will be sent to parents to solicit feedback from the sessions. Based upon this feedback, the PALP events may be adjusted to better align with parent needs. Additionally, in collaboration with the PTA, an online survey will be sent to all parents in January 2019, (midway through the academic year), to measure morale amongst parents pertaining to the overall school community as a means to measure engagement and solicit feedback. A second survey will be sent in May 2019 for comparison. The data collected from these surveys will provide guidance and help to establish goals for the 2019-2020 academic year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) SWDs, ELLs K-5,Lowest Third, Level 1 and Level 2 Scorers in ELA SWDs ,ELLs K-5, Lowest Third, Level 1 and Level 2 Scorers in Math SWDs ,ELLs K-5 Lowest Third, Level 1 and Level 2 Scorers in ELA SWDs ELLs K-5 Lowest Third, Level 1 and Level 2 Scorers in ELA Peer Mediation, Social Skills Training with Task Cards, Small Group Counseling with At Risk Students who are in need of support Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Recipe for Reading, Writing for Readers, TCRWP Reading and Writing, Reading Jeopardy ,Close Reading, Guided Reading Math Screener Centers, ECAM Centers, Journal Tasks, Sprints for Practice. Writing a Hypothesis / Thesis Statement, supporting evidence, Writing on Demand Targeting Specific Areas. TCRWP Content Areas Units, Center based instruction, integration of CC Information Reading/Writing Standards, Debate Social Skills Training, Talk Sessions guided with a Lead Student Facilitator, Peer interactive group talk for social skill training. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group, after school tutoring, SETTS Provider When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the Day with Special Education Teachers, After School Small group, after school tutoring, SETTS Provider During the Day with Classroom Teachers, After School Tutoring Small group, after school tutoring, one to one SETTS During the Day with Special Education Teachers, classroom teacher Small group, after school tutoring, one to one SETTS During the Day with Special Education Teachers, After School Small Group, One to One, Classes During the Day with Special Education Teachers, After School 9  0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). There are 12 students currently in Temporary Housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  We are planning to provide after school tutoring, school materials, trips, provide after school workshops and parents will be provided with translated materials based on need. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $ 11,997.00 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 3  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). PS 166 does not have a preschool program. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. An Assessment Team meets to outline the assessment practices in the school and will provide professional development on how to use these assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 4  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. [PS 166] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [PS 166] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 6  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 7  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. [PS 166] , School-Parent Compact (SPC) in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 8  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 9  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 0  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 1  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 03 School Name Richard Rodgers School of Arts Borough Manhattan School Number 166 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Debra Mastriano Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Deborah Cohen Teacher/Subject Area Nina Singh//Grade 2 GE Teacher/Subject Area Kara Johnson/Grade 4 ICT Related-Service Provider Suzanne Fellini/IEP/RTI Superintendent Ilene Altschul Assistant Principal Coach School Counselor Parent Sarwat Hasib Parent Coordinator Deborah Markewich Field Support Center Staff Member Fannie Castro Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 3  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 627 Total number of ELLs 27 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.31% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses TCRWP-Teachers College Reading Writing Project school-wide. In addition the ENL teacher supplements with teacher made modality rubrics based on NYSESLAT goals, common core standards/new language arts progressions and Our Way to English strategy checklists. In analysis of our ELLS Reading levels, based on June 2017 data we currently have 4 students at level A, 1 student at level B, 2 students at level C, 1 student at level D, 1 student at level E, 1 student level F, 2 students at level G, 3 students at level H, 2 at level I, 2 students at level K, 1 student at level L, 2 at M and 2 at N . According the TCRWP Benchmarks for Independent Reading Levels for June, of our 27 current ELLs represented in the data, 5 of our kindergarten students are below standards, our 2 Kindergarten students are meeting standards, and 4 are above standards. In grade one 5 students are below standards, and 2 students are meeting standards, of our 2 second graders are below standards and 2 are meeting standards, our four 3 third graders are below standards and 2 fifth graders are below standards. 4  22% of our ELLs are meeting standards, 15% above standards and 63% at risk in need of extra support. Because these benchmarks correlate to indicators of probable reading success on future state exams, this information is very helpful in forming guided reading groups across proficiency levels and grades as well as for regrouping on an ongoing basis based on need. As we continue to assess these students within the guided reading component of our balanced literacy program we can provide explicit teaching and support for reading increasingly challenging texts. The supplemental formative assessment modalities rubrics help inform us with appropriate scaffolds for individual students in the areas of speaking, listening and writing as well. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our school’s partnership with TCRWP-Teachers College Reading Writing Project structures our school curriculum. Coaches meet with teachers regularly to learn build theory and practice of this core assessment based curriculum. Teachers practice analyzing running records and assessment questions regularly with each other to build expertise in assessment practices connected to curriculum work. As a TCRWP school, we ensure that we are meeting Common Core Learning Standards across all grades and that all students including ELLs are writing and reading in a variety of genres. Our teachers engage in data driven instruction that targets student’s specific strength and growth areas. All grades engage in a multitude of data sources. Kindergarten through second grades use Running Records, Writing On Demands, Early Childhood Assessment of Mathematics (ECAM), formative assessments and inquiry cycles to ensure a thorough data-driven curriculum. Grades three through five utilize Running Records, Writing On demands, Math Screener Centers, Writing About Reading, formative assessments and inquiry cycles to inform instruction. In math, teachers are provided with bi-weekly staff development to grow their conceptual understanding of the Common Core Math Standards and Common Core shifts through K-5 number talks. In addition, our math consultant works with teachers to review until assessments to guide differentiated instruction and best mathematical practices. Our TCRWP coaches provide staff development in the areas of reading and writing workshop. All of our coaches work to ensure vertical alignment in support of all students including ELLs across grades. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs by using summative assessments and analyzing results on the NYSESLAT and other exams. On the Spring 2016 NYSESLAT, of the 16 students taking the exam, we had 3 students reach commanding level, 5 students move at least one level, 7 stay the same and 1 regressed a level. In deeper analysis these students becoming commanding met their annual Measurable Achievement Objective by increasing 43 or more point in combined modalities from the 2015 to the 2016 exam.Our one 4th grader taking the exam had entered a couple weeks prior scoring Entering on the NYSITELL and then remaining at that same level after only being in the country for a brief time. Our three first grades, now second graders remained at the Expanding level scoring 100 percent on speaking and only a one or two raw score points away from Commanding and the other first grader jumped from Entering to Expanding. Our current first grade hold over student as well as the others who did did not make their AYP for reading level we will look more closely at aligning their goals and sevice needs to further help reach proficiency. We set ELL learning targets and interim goals for each child in order to closely monitor their progress through out the year. In addition, our school uses TCRWP running records as summative assessments as well to identify baseline, progress and areas of need. In addition we use On Demand Writing to measure progress. The ELL Periodic assessments are utilized for students in grades 3-5 to measure modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers work together in grade level teams to analyze data to inform instruction. Based on benchmark assessment data, they work in inquiry groups and form both guided leveled and strategy based groups to ensure targeted learning is occurring. The ENL teacher analyzes NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores and creates supplemental modality rubrics to help inform us with appropriate scaffolds for individual students in the areas of listening, speaking, reading and writing. Our data is organized onto a shared google drive for readable access. We work collaboratively on strategies to help ELLs during professional learning time as well as ELL articulation time. We continue to work on aligning ELA Common Core and New Language Arts Progressions of Learning and work together to bridge the gap. In addition, during our Monday professional development time, the grade teams devote inquiry time to current and former ELL periodic assessments as well as On Demand Writing with a focus on ELL needs. 5  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses data to guide instruction within the RTI framework. Our RTI team meets weekly in order to implement effective interventions for students including struggling language learners. Our school has implemented an RTI action plan using research based programs. Teachers provide 3 Tiers of instructional support. Teachers provide Tier 1 Core Instruction - Rigorous and evidence based curriculum, including English language development for ELLs serving 80% of students' needs. Tier II Double Dose of Instruction - Extra attention, activities, and experience targeted to specific students in addition to core instruction serves about 5-10% of students. Tier III Intensive Intervention-Intensive and individualized instruction (small group or 1:1 serves about 1-5% of students.) A progress monitoring form is given to all teachers to collect data to make decisions about changes in goals, instruction and/or services;as well as whether to consider a referral for special education services. For our ELLs specifically the expected rate of the ELL's progress takes into account language development and background. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our school uses EDAT information about Annual Measurable Achievement Objectives to reflect instructional decisions . AMAO tool helps us key into who is meeting their AMAO by making progress, attaining proficiency and achieving AYP in ELA and Math. From our latest NYSISTELL/NYSESLAT data exam history, we learned to 7 students remained at the same level, 5 increased proficiency level, 1 slipped down a level and 3 scored commanding. Our 5th grader who took the ELA , his AMAO data reveals that he is at risk for academic risk in ELA due to his 1 on the state ELA test. Disaggregation within combined modality for the remaining current ELLs who took the Spring 2016 NYSESLAT do not have consecutive year progress data because they were first year ELLs. Using the scale score range conversion measurement chart based on raw scores modality break down , data reveals that most of the children across grades K-4 reached proficiency in one or more of the modalities but are still ELL status because of not reaching proficiency in all modalities. Patterns across the board reveal listening and speaking skills in productive and receptive modalities are significantly higher than reading and writing skills. Oracy skills are more developed than literacy skills, but all areas need development especially for our 2 Spring test takers whose Speaking score remains in the Transitioning range and 2 others in the Expanding range. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In order to match instruction based on findings for our range of literacy needs, the school's LAP will target our ELLs' needs in both social and academic language. Teachers College on- demand writing, reading levels, teacher made rubrics aligning stages of language acquisition development, NYSESLAT goals plans measuring the Common Core Learning Standards and the New Language Arts Progressions are given at interim points in the year. The ENL teacher along with classroom teachers set target goals in all modalities and monitor progress throughout the year. Children's instruction will be supported with ENL methodology as they are engaged in meaningful contextual activities and class projects. The consideration of all modalities is important so that all instruction will allow opportunity to use the four skills. For example, the excellent use of music, poetry, shared reading, read-alouds, and phonemic awareness starting in Kindergarten with continuous reinforcement of skills throughout the grades. Discussion in partnerships and hands-on activities using a multisensory approach will help improve productive skills and integrate the modalities. Teacher modeling and think-alouds will help activate prior knowledge and support metacognition. Emphasis on accountable talk will ensure the development of speaking and listening in the academic setting. BICS and CALP will be integrated. Writing will be supported with immersion in various literacy genres, mentor texts and use of graphic organizers and interactive writing. Continuous vocabulary development will be aided with visual and relia support. Ongoing assessment of learning will be used to help scaffold learning to the next level. In our free-standing ENL model, our instructional focus is on improving academic language skills by continuing to integrate oracy and literacy in all lessons to build each ELLs ability to tackle text complexity based on AMAO and interim data aligned to the units of study designated as per CR Part 154-2. Part IV: ELL Programming 6  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In the Freestanding ENL program instruction is delivered by the ENL teacher working balancing and rotating the push-in pull out models, planning with classroom teachers to ensure curricular alignment. In the push in model, the ENL teacher works with these target students during ELA instruction in collaboration with the regular classroom teacher. In order to comply with mandates,stand-alone/integrated ENL is delivered as the teacher provides support and can scaffold instruction to make the subject area information more comprehensible while the ELLs retain content instruction time. Language acquisition and vocabulary support in English are provided to these target children. The pull-out model is also utilized to homogeneously group for target area of instruction according to NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores and depending on the proficiency levels and heterogeneous make-up of classes. Needs within individual modalities are analyzed in order to target instruction and form groups based on needs. Since our ENL teacher is certified in both ENL as well as common branch we are able to balance the mandated standalone minute needs of our entering/emerging students and maximize push in integrated ENL time as per CR Part 154.2 . In setting up classes we continue to work towards grouping ELLs in the same class on a grade level in order to maximize the push-in model to build language acquisition and retain content instruction in context of mainstream class. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The staff works together to organize their schedules to meet the needs of the ELLS. Our entering and emerging students receive 360 minutes per week of ENL/ESL instruction. Of those 360 minutes, 1 unit (180 minutes) will be dedicated to ENL and 1 unit (180 minutes) is dedicated to ENL/ELA. Our transitioning and expanding ELLs will receive 180 minutes per week as per CR Part 154-2. Of those180 minutes, .5 units will be dedicated to ENL/ELA (90 minutes) and .5 units will be dedicated to integrated ENL/content area (90 minutes). We will meet the mandated minutes of instruction mandated by CR Part 154-2 by using both the pull out and push in models. The ENL teacher balances push in pull out work within the framework of an 8 period day to ensure explicit ENL is delivered as the teacher provides support and can scaffold instruction to make the subject area information more comprehensible while the ELLs retain content instruction time. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Planning and instruction continues to be aligned with common core learning standards and aligned with classroom literacy units of study. Differentiation of student needs is taken into account. Students demonstrate learning through ongoing observation, assessments as well as utilizing rubrics and class projects. The ENL teacher scaffolds instruction using ESL methodology in English in the context of the balanced literacy instructional approach in order to make content comprehensible to foster and enrich language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Instructional attention is given to teacher modeling of metacognitive strategies in literacy as well as creating visuals, graphic organizers, sentence starters that describe characters, settings and major events. and using manipulatives, pocket charts and words banks to support academic vocabulary used for mathematical reasoning and modeling, social studies and science content area concepts. Writing is supported with immersion in various literacy genres, mentor texts and use of graphic organizers and interactive writing. Running records, portfolios and conferences are used to ensure appropriate learning 7  changes over time. For those students at entering through transitioning level stages, native language supports in the form of picture dictionaries and word to word glossaries are used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our school ensures that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native languages initially by administering the Spanish LAB to those who qualify. For state assessments we order side by side testing materials translated into their native languages. For those students whose language is not available in side by side translated version we provide Translators in the native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Active planning is taking place to ensure appropriate strategy work and differentiation for the various subgroups of ELLs in our school community. Although we have no SIFE or long term ELLs at this time our plan for SIFE and long term ELLs is to receive response to intervention academic intervention services in reading, writing and math. Newcomers to our community will have an emphasis on TPR strategies and be given the necessary time to interact with those who are more proficient. In addition, for our Ells in US schools less than three years, we use Rigby Our Way to English shared reading, song, and vocabulary building kits as well as thematic teaching to develop an experiential knowledge base. Because NCLB now requires that ELLs will be taking the ELA after one year, we will be providing them with explicit test taking strategies and continue to align instruction with the ELA curriculum. Our plan for our developing ELLs receiving service for 4-6 years is to analyze their NYSESLAT and benchmark assessment data across content areas and modalities and continue to scaffold their academic learning with ELL best practices in the classroom. Because these students continue to receive services based on on CR part 154 extension of services we closely monitor needs and target Tier II and Tier III instruction with RTI, AIS and differentiation within their Integrated Collaborative Team Teaching Classes. Our plan for continuing transitional support of ELLs reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT for up to two years is to monitor these students at points during push- in group work. They will all receive (90 minutes) .5 unit of study per week of integrated ENL in ELA/Core Content Area. They will also be used at times as helpers in partnerships with less proficient students. These ELLs reaching proficiency will continue to receive the accommodation for ELLs on state exams for up to 2 years. Based on results of ongoing classroom assessment data some of these transitional ELLs are invited to our after school Title III ELL academy. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? For our ELLs with special needs, their IEP will be reviewed in order to determine an appropriate plan. The ENL teacher collaborates with the classroom teacher to modify tasks and plan appropriate scaffolds. Teachers of ELL-SWDs align grade level standards with mainstream classes and adapt baseline and interim assessment tasks based on individual student need. Results of these frequent assessment tasks are used to group students to give them better access to mainstream core curriculum. Supplemental Fundations and Explode the Code program materials aid in phonics and vocabulary development for these ELL-SWD. Using ELL scaffolding strategies of bridging, modeling, contextualization, schema building, text representation and metacognitive development teachers provide these students access to grade level academic content areas as well as accelerate English language acquisition development. In addition, patterned reading books increasing with leveled meaning based texts, shared reading songs, chants, theme kits, pictorial graphs, sentence frame starters and word banks aid in building repetitive structures thus boosting new language concept vocabulary as well as academic content. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. Literacy Block is departmentalized for fluid movement between classrooms for homogeneous leveled 8  reading groups. Use of universal design principles such as books on tape, interactive book reading on the computer and peer to peer reading to ensure that content area information is accessed. We will continue to work on strategies to differentiate instruction in the mainstream classroom as well as with RTI Tier II small group at- risk work. Our IEP/RTI teacher, Ms. Fellini, works collaboratively with teacher and service providers to ensure ELL-SWDs whose IEP mandates ESL instruction receive appropriate programming. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school offers a range of targeted intervention programs in English for our subgroups of ELLs in ELA, math, and science focusing on ELLs at risk for not attaining one year of value added growth. Targeted intervention services are given to our 4-6 year subgroup of ELLs mainly targeting students in need of extension of services based on CR Part 154-2. These services include extended afternoon Tuesdays as a TIER 2 intervention. Students work with a classroom assistant and peer tutor as a TIER 1 intervention 2 days a week. In addition in order to help our 4-6 year subgroup who have been designated at risk, the ENL teacher meets with classroom teachers for Professional Development to work on ELL instructional strategies that support students during Literacy Block time. Under the RTI program students are seen in AIS 3 to 4 times a week as TIER 2 intervention. These ELLs not meeting grade level standards in ELA, Math and Science receive small group targeted work as well as in the Science Lab to reinforce inquiry-based skills. Recipe for Reading in utilized for ELLs in second grade newcomer group as well as one former ELL whose reading level work could be aided with strong phonetic based work. In addition at risk 0 -3 year newcomer first graders and second grader subgroup work with B’nai Jeshurun reading volunteers and may attend the Stephen Gaynor School after school program. Learning Leaders volunteers assist our ELLs in all subgroups with research and book selection in our school library. Our science teacher helps differentiate needs of ELLs across subgroups in the science lab. All ELLs in grades K-5 are invited to attend our after school Title III academy to work on guided reading, writing, and math academic vocabulary as well as integrated science and social studies thematic activities. The above listed range of intervention services offered in our school are offered in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? To date, no new programs are being considered for the upcoming school year that were not in place last year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? To date, no programs will be discontinued this year as we are in still in tune with programs from the last few years. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. All students, including ELLs at P.S. 166, participate in the following curricular program: All classes are taught using the Workshop Model, combining mini-lessons with group, shared and independent work. In Literacy, teachers use a balanced literacy approach in teaching reading, writing and word study. P.S 166 uses a Engage NY Math Curriculum across all grades. It provides a differentiated instructive approach where students are grouped based on readiness level. ECAM center assessments and Math Screeners are used to develop number sense across grades. Built in sentence frames provide language support for ELL students and help to develop the math language of all students in a meaningful context. The groups are flexible and change based on the current unit of study. In addition, as a supplement we are using the city’s recommended program Go Math to further differentiate for our students. Our classes implement the FOSS/Delta program of science discovery and investigation. Social Studies is incorporated into the literacy curriculum in each of our classes. We follow the New York State curriculum in this area. All students including ELLs receive instruction in computers, physical education, dance, music and art cluster periods. All of our arts programs follow the Blueprint for the Arts manual from the Department of Education. In addition all of our ELLs have the opportunity to participate with their classes in supplemental services of external organization programs with Wellness in the Schools (healthy cooking and eating labs) Mannes School of Music, Landmarks West, Salvadori, TADA!, Vital Theater, Chess in the Schools Program, the American Museum of Natural History, and the Horticultural Society, Learning Leaders in the Library- in addition to the above mentioned 9  new programs for this year. All students including ELLs are invited to participate in our after school re-create club sponsored by the PTA to provide students with a variety of extracurricular opportunities such as sports, chess and musicals. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Appropriate instructional materials are selected to support ELLs across curriculum areas. They are chosen based on the class unit of study calendar for each grade. These materials are chosen when possible to reflect the target culture and are chosen because students can make a connection from the books to their lives. Realia, games, theme kits and picture support are continuously embedded into lessons for content, vocabulary and language support from Rigby, National Geographic and Lakeshore companies. Use of shared reading, poems and songs help our beginning ELLs as well as graphic organizers, differentiated for student need across proficiency levels. Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and Beyond by Attanasio and Associates are utilized as well as Continental press which reflect the newest NYSESLAT. Technology is infused into the curriculum. Our early grades are using Kidpix to write reading responses and make maps of the community as well as Starfall program to develop beginning reading skills. If students are writing memoirs they create webs, timelines with history and posters for country research. Kidspiration program is used for creating systematic webs for organizing ideas. Powerpoint is utilized for creating picture books and non fiction presentations. In addition, Fun brain and Excel are used for Math support. The Renzulli Learning program provides differentiated instruction based on the individual student interest and readiness level on the computer. The students also take part in the school wide enrichment module where they are broken up into learning clusters based on student surveys. In addition I-pads are accessible for small group work. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? . The Native Language is integrated as part of the Balanced Literacy Instruction and content area instruction as children are given opportunity to read books in their native language as a genre choice during independent reading. Students’ prior knowledge is activated to support participation. It is important that the native language is used to support challenging areas of instruction. Books and picture dictionaries are purchased in students’ native languages and brought into classrooms. Technology programs are also being investigated. Parents are encouraged to share books from home in the native language after reading them with their children. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. There are a variety of services and resources available to all of our ELLs if needed to achieve and maintain a satisfactory level of academic performance corresponding to their age and grade level. These include: guidance, psychology, occupational therapy, physical therapy as well as speech and language services and small group instruction provided by a Special Education teacher. ENL students receiving special education services in accordance with his/her IEP are also eligible for ENL services as recommended in the IEP. Developmental age appropriate materials are ordered for ELLs who require it. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school does not share a building collocation. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All newly enrolled ELL students are invited to attend an informational session as well as a walking tour of the school with the parent coordinator and volunteer parents. In addition, upon arrival into their classroom, new arrivals are paired up with a more proficient buddy to help them acculturate to their new environment with assistance from the ENL teacher/Language Access Coordinator. We also introduce newly enrolled ELLs and their families to current families who speak the same language in order to create a school buddy and parent support system it the family with the same language expresses interest. New parents also receive a school handbook and PTA calendar. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 0  No formal language electives are offered at our school. Parents can opt to sign up their children for a Spanish and French class as part of the after school Re-create enrichment program. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ELL professional development of methodology and strategies for teaching ELLs continue in the school to ensure quality teaching and learning. Teachers are given time to familiarize themselves with second language acquisition and alignment of standards to help plan lessons to meet the needs of the language proficiency levels on ELLs. The ENL teacher articulates with teachers monthly and provides techniques and strategies to use with our ELLs in the mainstream classrooms. As part of the school’s professional development, eight sessions will be planned during monthly articulations with teachers. These sessions will give teachers the opportunity to explore ENL strategies and methodology each one with the lens of language acquisition, including best practices for co-teaching strategies as well as integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Tentative dates and topics are as follows: November 9, 2017– How the NYSESLAT and other assessments help us plan instruction December 7, 2017 – Interactive/Expository Writing with ELLs January 4, 2018 – Aligning Common Core/New Language Arts Progressions and bridging the gap for our students February 1, 2018– Math and the ELL student March 7, 2018 – Thematic units and center activities to meet the needs of ELLs April 4, 2018- Technology and the ELL Student May 2, 2018– ELLs and Gifted Education June 6, 2018– Differentiation/RTI and the IEP Student In addition, These Title III content teachers turnkey ELL strategy learning from our seven 1 hour title III PD sessions to colleagues at monthly grade conferences to build capacity and deepen ELL differentiation among teachers, administration and staff. Our diverse LAP team also ensures ongoing ELL learning and updates needs for our students and staff. Our licensed ENL pedagogue, Ms. Cohen maintains records of our Professional development in room 509A. All other teachers and staff maintain their own records of Jose P. hour PD learnings and handouts in individual classrooms and offices. The Office of English Language Learners offers professional development opportunities for ENL and monolingual staff. These opportunities are posted and emailed to staff. All personnel including the assistant principal, ENL teacher/coordinator, common branches teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselor, special education teachers, occupational/physical therapists, speech therapists, secretaries and parent coordinator are included in PD offerings. Staff members are encouraged to participate in these workshops on a rotating basis. At times the ENL teacher is sent to a workshop with another staff member to ensure ELL content alignment for turn keying information. Our ENL teacher is also part of our grade inquiry teams where appropriate data and scaffolds are presented to staff member across grade levels. In addition a book called English Language Learners Day by Day K-6- A Complete Guide to Literacy ,Content Area and Language Instruction is being read and discussed during our ELL academy after school professional development study group as well as ongoing topics on differentiation for ELLs from current journal articles. The ENL teacher participates in ongoing school-based as well as Professional development provided by the office of English Language Learners, News and Opportunities for 1  Educators of ELLs from the Division of ELLs and Student Support, ELL compliance specialists, UFT and Teachers College. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator and ENL teacher meet together to target students that will be good matches for particular middle schools. The ENL teacher shares PD best practice ENL strategies with the Guidance Counselor at RTI meetings, LAP team work time as well as ongoing articulations about individual students. In addition to receiving professional development turnkey information of strategies to help ELLs transition, she also is invited to attend PD opportunities via email. Our school fulfills the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 by ensuring that ELL articulation meetings for all teachers and staff consist of at least 15% of the required PD hours for all teachers prescribed by CR part 80 dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Each teacher is given an ELL differentiation packet in October with handouts dedicated to language acquisition as well as best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating content in language. Examples for the Danielson Framework of Teaching in questioning, alignment of ELL assessments with language acquisition rubrics, graphic organizers and guided reading essentials for ELLs are included. During monthly articulation, the packets are utilized within the topics addressed. For example, when introducing technology with ELLs, strategies are discussed keeping best practices combining content and ESL methodology as well as targeting specific levels of acquisition. The ENL teacher fulfills the 50% dedication to ELL PD by seeking ELL PD throughout the year, after school workshops, online resources such as www.teachingchannel.org videos, Teacher’s College model videos as well as professional journals and online material provide by the office of English Language Learners and other ELL related websites. In addition our after school Title III study group provides inquiry learning of ELL Essential Best Practices for our ENL and Content Teachers alike, to then turnkey and build ELL differentiation knowledge school wide. The ENL teacher keeps a copy of the confirmation/attendance, agenda and handouts for all professional development in a binder in room 509A. Our school also has a PD turn-key form as a means to reflect and dialogue with colleagues regarding our new learning for all professional development. A completed hard copy of the form is kept in the school office for reference. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In order to recognize the importance of family and community involvement in the education of ELLs and strengthen communication with parents, all parents of newly enrolled ELLs are provided with an orientation session on the State standards, assessments, school expectations and a general program description. At this September 2017meeting, parents are provided with an orientation video and materials in their native language to explain and clarify information about services for ELLs. There will also be two additional workshop meetings for parents during the school year. One to present information on learning targets in relation to students' common core standard based academic content and language development progress and helping their children at home in November 2016 and the second on questions concerning curriculum and methodology used with the students and getting ready for the ELA and NYSESLAT in March 2018. Translators will be provided during the meetings for parents and all written materials will be in both English and preferred language. Over the phone interpretation is utilized if an in house or parent volunteer is unavailable.Parents of ELL students are invited to meet with their child’s teachers regularly and are provided time to discuss goals, language development progress, language proficiency results and needs in all content areas on a rotating basis on parent engagement Tuesdays.Our ENL teacher meets with ELL families and their classroom teachers weekly to share and practice scaffolds to key into and share next step strategies to assist with class work and homework. Translators will be available on an “as needed” basis.The above plan fulfills the new mandate addressed in the ELL Policy Reference guide of at least one additional meeting including school staff necessary to sufficiently inform parents or guardians about the child's language development in all content areas in English in our ENL program. Such meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent best understands.Our 2  school records attendance in a parent articulation log in the ENL teacher, Ms. Cohen's ENL record keeping binder in room 509A. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. All parents are invited to our Community Building Meetings to plan activities and events that build community like publishing parties, potluck dinner and Principal's Tea. In addition ELL families are invited to workshops on ELLs topics and strategies to help at home. They are also invited to an ELL Academy Culmination Party to celebrate children's work throughout the year. We have an active Parent Association where parents including parents of ELLs work together to raise money at various fundraisers like Fall Fest, Annual Auction and Magazine Drive.Written translation is utilized in preferred language when needed. In house bilingual staff members are called upon, parent volunteers and over the phone interpretation when needed. 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Debra Mastriano, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: #INGES Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Debra Mastriano Title Principal Vanessa Baldina Assistant Principal Deborah Markewich Parent Coordinator Deborah Cohen ENL/Bilingual Teacher Sarwat Hasib Parent Eileen Goldberg/Grade1GE Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Lio/Grade 4ICT Teacher/Subject Area Ilene Altschul Fannie Castro Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Suzanne Fellini Other IEP/RTI Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/16/2017 6/16/2017 6/16/2017 6/16/2017 6/16/2017 6/16/2017 6/16/2017 6/16/2017 6/16/2017 6/16/2017 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 03 School Name: Richard Rodgers Superintendent: I Altschul The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Deborah Cohen ENL Teacher/Coordinator NA NA NA NA NA NA Yes NA NA Yes NA NA * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 166 assesses their school’s written translation needs by identifying the primary language spoken by the parents at the initial interview given by the ENL teacher and by trained staff at the time of registration. In addition, it uses information from the Blue Emergency Home Contact Cards as well as Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey. This information is recorded in ATS in a RAPL report by the attendance teacher. The report is on ATS and a copy is kept in the main office, at the ENL Room as well as with the Parent Coordinator. A report of the languages that parents speak, by class and grade is created and updated regularly. 6  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Spanish French Korean Chinese 2 9 1 1 5 .003 .014 .001 .001 .007 1 2 1 1 1 .001 .003 .001 .001 .001 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NA Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Ongoing newsletters/ calendars- Sept/June Families 10/6, 11/10, 1/5, 2/2, 3/8, 4/5, 5/3, and 6/7. In addition interpretation vendors will be contacted 2 weeks prior if needed for the following parent workshops: January 12, 2016 (Grade level workshops on Writing), March 15, 2016 ( K-2 – Reading Workshop 3-5 – Testing Workshop (ELA)), March 22, 2016 (K-2 Math Workshop, 3-5 Testing Workshop (Math)),April 12, 2016, ( K-2 – Writing Workshop 3-5 Reflecting on the ELA Test/Next Steps for Math Test), and 5/24 Science Workshops. All translation requests to the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be submitted at least two weeks ahead of time for ongoing and event specific needs. procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Written translation communicated in letters and memos will be provided by in–house bilingual staff members. In addition parent volunteers will be called upon for written translation of school correspondence on an as needed basis to ensure timely provision of translated documents ongoing throughout the year including correspondence such as newsletters, calendars, parent-teacher conference announcements, after school information, NYS testing dates, general overview of student curriculum and letters from school leadership. If needed for reference, templates of school recess notifications and exam notification letters can be found via Intranet School support from the Translation and Interpretation Unit. If further need arises we will complete a translation request form and submit it to translations@schools.nyc.gov to ensure 7  NA NA NA parents receive needed critical information about their child’s education. Pertinent school information such as Citywide Behavior Expectations, Great Expectations by Grade level as well as Middle School Directory are sent in hard copy via DOE mail to our school as well and can be downloaded from the DOE covered languages. The ENL teacher will provide translated letters in needed languages provided by the DOE at the Orientation meeting so that the parents can make informed decisions about program selection and placement. Our school has planned the following parent engagement event dates and will contact interpretation vendors in a timely manner 2 weeks prior if necessary for each. NA NA NA NA NA NA 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Formal face to face meetings our school typically has throughout the year are as follows: Parent Engagement Back to School Night (September), Tuesdays(weekly), Parent Teacher Conferences (November, March , May), August interpretation service(s)? Submit requests to translation unit at least 2 weeks to one month prior to event For each event-specific date our school plans to disseminate parent -facing documents and submit translation requests to the Translation and Interpretation Unit at least two weeks ahead of time. For example, for Family Fitness Night occurring May 24, our school will ensure needed requests on or before May 10 th . We have a calendar set up with reminders to ensure needed preferred language requests in a timely manner in our PS 166 Family Handbook pocket calendar for each event respectively for the above noted ongoing events. 8  Principal’s Tea (October, January , May), October,February, April Fall Fest (October), PTA Meetings (Monthly), Sept., Dec.,April Family Fitness Night (May). In addition ongoing face to face meetings occur for IEP related service conferences, attendance teacher and guidance counselor calls to parents. NA NA NA September April NA NA NA NA NA NA 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We will use in house bilingual proficient staff and family list kept on school office and parent coordinators office updated regularly. WE will work to provide an auto message in preferred languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our designated LAC turnkeys important information to teachers and staff on translation and interpretation services for parents.. She attends meetings and provides the school community with resources available to meet compliance. For example websites and documents. 9  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school will fulfill parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services, as per Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663. In addition to ATS report of preferred languages, our school keeps on file updated blue emergency cards with a current record of the primary language of each parent. In addition, we keep on file a list of all parents requiring language assistance in order to communicate effectively regarding their child’s education. Our school provides translation and interpretation services to all parents who require language assistance in order to communicate effectively with their child’s education. Parents are provided with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities, which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. In addition, we post signs for assessment documents and translated report cards on an as needed basis. For general assistance and more information we have a WELCOME poster at the front of the school in multiple languages, and language ID guide at the security desk and main office. We compiled a list of staff available for translation/interpretation, which is kept on file in the Parent Coordinator’s office. All notification documents can be found at the Translation and Interpretation Unit's intranet site:http://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/translation_and_interpretation_unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school gathers feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. Ensuring the quality of our language services is critical to communicating effectively with our parents of English language learners. Currently, our school uses the School Survey for Parents to gather feedback on availability and quality of services. This survey is made available to all school-aged parents to assess their child’s school, including whether or not they are communicated with in their native language. In addition, the parent coordinator receives informal oral and emailed feedback as to the nature of their preferred language needs being met so that we can plan for needed next steps. 0 
