 06M173 School Name: P.S. 173 Principal: RACHAEL GARCIA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: P.S. 173 06M173 PK-5 Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 06M173 School Address: 306 Fort Washington Avenue Phone Number: 212-927-7850 Fax: 212-740-0905 School Contact Person: Rachael Garcia Email Address: RGarcia31@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Rachael Garcia Jose Rodriguez EnildaBeltre DimitriKryoneris Victoria Farez n/a District Information Geographical District: 6 Superintendent: Manuel Ramirez Superintendent’s Office Address: 4360 Broadway,NY, NY, 10033 Superintendent’s Email Address: MRamire4@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 917-521-3757 Fax: 917-521-3797 Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Manhattan Executive Director: Yuet Chu Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 Seventh Ave, Room 828, NY, NY, 10001 Executive Director’s Email Address: YChu@schools.nyc.gov   Phone Number: 646-470-0721 Fax: 212-339-1735   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rachael Garcia/Dimitri Kryoneris Jose Rodriguez EnildaBeltre Katrina DeMorizi NarlyAlfonso Deyanira De La Rosa DemetroRodriguez Deborah Jimenez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent   Christine Riolo Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Mission:   P.S.173 will provide all children with multiple opportunities to succeed. Students will want to come to school every day because of the support and nurturing they receive, the welcoming environment they encounter, and the fun they have as they are engrossed in rigorous and hands-on learning activities. Students are immersed in a variety of academic programs and engaged in several enrichment activities. Our students will receive individualized small group instruction daily aligned with the instructional focus of the school. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Over the past year P.S. 173 has partnered with District 6's program called Universal Literacy, which we utilized to continue to enhance our reading and writing instruction at the school. In addition, we allocated funds for Fall and Spring Saturday Academy to meet the mathematical needs of our students. The school has a partnership with Columbia Presbyterian Hospital as they maintain a school-based clinic at the school providing mental health services to families and students identified as 'at risk'. This year the school is working with Community Based Organization (CBO) to operate a comprehensive after school program. The school has partnerships with several organizations that provide sports programs to upper grade students; Columbia-Presbyterian/Turn-2 (basketball and baseball), America Scores (soccer and literacy), Track and Field and Mighty Milers organized by the New York Road - Runners, various events at the Armory such as the Uptown Games. This year we were able to create girls teams for basketball and softball. The school has also continued it's partnership with Dancing Classrooms which exposes all fifth grade students to Ballroom Dancing one period per week and an eventual city-wide competition. The school has collaborated with Inside Broadway to provide performing arts instruction for the fourth grade students. Our 3rd Graders were offered the opportunity to participate in a Robotics Program on Saturday. Lastly, to ensure a safe and inclusive school culture, we provided Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports (PBIS) Assembly provided by Omegaman and Friends (Superhero Anti-Bullying School Assemblies). We continue to utilize 173’s Core Beliefs: At P.S. 173...  o We have a voice. o We make our learning visible. o We try our best in all we do. o We are bucket fillers. o We work together to make a difference. P.S. 173's clear and high expectations of all students be cognitively engaged in rigorous curricula and challenging tasks was an area of celebration as measured by our most recent PPO visits which is aligned to Quality Review indicators. We also utilized the data from last year's Quality Review. We continue to work to improve trust among all stakeholders to improve teacher survey participation. Activities will include frequent teacher highlights and a teacher recognition program, Bucket Fillers Initiative, Student of the Month celebrations, Reading Cave Adventures, and intervention plans with Community Partnerships like Columbia-Presbyterian Hospital. In addition, we utilized our "adoption program" that became a school wide initiative called "Brightening a 173 Star." Classroom teachers were given the opportunity to identify two to three students that would benefit from additional social emotional behavioral support from other P.S. 173 Staff. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  Public School 173 has a present enrollment of 510 students; (14.51%) English Language Learners and (18.43%) Students with Disabilities, (91.18%) are Hispanic, (2.55%) Black, (2.94%) White, (2.94%) Asian and (.20%) Other. The school has a (90%) free/reduced lunch rate. As many students are bilingual and some are former English Language Learners, this influences the instructional practices that teachers implement to support student learning across the day. Student achievement is rooted in all of the work that we do each day. More specifically, English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities need to show greater representation in Levels 3 & 4 in 2018 as measured by New York State Exams. While we recognize that students are more complex than a standardized test score, we recognize our need to improve student achievement as it relates to NYS Testing; specifically NYS English Language Arts & Mathematics Exams. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. P.S. 173 has Specialty Teachers for Physical Education, Art, Music, and STEAM. In addition, we have a Library (funded by Carmel Hill) and serves students in Grades Pre-Kindergarten-5. All the students are exposed to Visual Arts, Music, STEAM, and mandated Physical Education requirements. Some students experience technology in multiple ways through the use of Smart boards, I-Pads, desktop computers, etc. STEAM is an acronym for science, technology, engineering, art and mathematics. STEAM education can be taught by infusing these four disciplines and teaching them as an integrated subject matter rather than isolation. NYS ELA Exam results from 2017 indicate that 33.8% of students scored Levels 3 & 4, an increase of 4.4% from the previous year. NYS Math Exam results from 2017 indicate that 36.5% of students scored Levels 3 & 4, an increase of 9.9% from the previous year. Official NYS ELA & Math Exams for 2018 scores, specifically Levels 2's 3s & 4s, are in process. The areas of growth for this year will be in English Language Arts (Vocabulary and Reading Comprehension) and in Mathematics (Number Sense and Measurement). Revised assessment methods were implemented to support small group instructional practices during the Literacy Block. In alignment with the District-wide priorities, we continue to expand learning opportunities for students by providing tutoring programs on Saturdays as well as twice during the week. Instructional Focus: To continue to build school-wide instructional consistency by:  consistently checking for understanding in all lessons using formative assessment to drive instruction  having well thought out and rigorous lesson plans that allow for high-level of student engagement through questioning and discussion during student tasks  supporting students using the Gradual Release of Responsibility to develop student independence and group practices 1   implementing tiered intervention strategies to support English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M173 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 489 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 40 40 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 8 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 1 1 School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 85.1% % Reduced Lunch 12.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 91.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.2 0% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 39.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 79% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YSH YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 46 44 92.9% 5.1% 17.8% 2.5% 3.1% 0.4% 4 2% 5 32.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Upon reviewing the results of our school’s 2017 New York State English Language Arts Test Scores for grades 3 - 5, we noted that the percentage of students who scored a level 1 in the ELA exam decreased by 6.5% from 2018. The percentage of students who scored within levels 3 and 4 on the ELA exam increased by 4.6% from 2018. We also noted that the percentage of students who scored a level 1 on the New York State Mathematics Test Scores for grades 3 - 5 decreased by 11% from 2016. In addition, the percentage of students who scored within levels 3 and 4 on the Math exam increased by 9.9% from 2016. Student Achievement  ELA levels 3 and 4 29.2% in 2016 increased to 35.2% in 2017  Math levels 3 and 4 26.6% un 2016 increased to 36.5% in 2017 ***NYS Exams Results for 2018 will be entered when we receive the data Priority Needs Assessment  ELA level 1 decreased by 9% in 2017, our goal will be to decrease the level 1 30% an additional 5-7%.  Math level 1 decreased by 10% in 2017, our goal will be to decrease the level 1 28% an additional 5-7% ***NYS Exams Results for 2018 will be entered when we receive the data 4  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will increase students’ academic progress in mathematics evidenced by a decreasing the number of students with level 1s by at least 10%. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. In order to meet this goal, our school will continue to use an approved Common Core Aligned curriculum for Mathematics instruction. All student levels 9/5/18 - 6/26/19 Principal, Assistant Principals, Lead Teachers, Coaches and Educational Consultants and AIS teachers Classroom Teachers in grades 2-5, Assistant Principals and Principal 9/5/18 - 6/26/19 11/06/18 - 6/26/19 9/30/18 - 6/26/19 Classroom Teachers and Instructional Coaches 2. We will assign AIS Teachers to work with students performing below grade-level in Mathematics. 3. Academic after school and Saturday programs that target Level 1s & 2s students for Math. These specialized programs will include support for our schools' targeted subgroups: more than 20% of our students who are bilingual and/or ELLs /Former ELLs and the more than 14% of students with IEPs. Teacher teams, the instructional coach, and support staff will plan comprehensive instruction for Saturday and After School that is based on the 2013-2016 ELA/Math Performance Data report. 4. Teachers will regularly analyze and utilize relevant student data, including, but not limited to, Periodic assessment data, NYS Test data (Grades 3 & 4), Performance Task results, and Math Unit assessments, to formulate tasks and align instruction that meet students’ current needs in mathematics. Students performing in levels 1-2 in ELA and Math. Students performing within levels 1-2 in ELA and Math, ELL's, Students with disabilities. All student levels. 6 5. Staff developers, including but not limited to our Instructional Coaches, IEP Coordinator, AIS Teachers, and School Administrators will provide on-going professional development workshops on Monday and Tuesday afternoons in developing rigorous, differentiated lessons reflective of data analysis. This professional development support will be informed by comprehensive data-analysis of the results of teacher's Danielson-based classroom observations. Support staff will meet at least once monthly to analyze Danielson observation results and develop actionable strategies that improve teacher practice across classrooms and close the achievement gap. To supplement support provided by administration and support staff, teachers will also meet at least once monthly within pre-selected inquiry teams wherein the will examine the different components of the Danielson Rubric, and discuss strategies to improve teacher practice across all grades and subject areas. 6. The Bilingual Coordinator will provide professional development to teachers on Monday and Tuesday afternoons for Teachers so that they may include appropriate scaffolds in their lesson plans and provide multiple entry points for success for English Language Learners. 7. Teacher Teams will meet during scheduled common planning periods to analyze data from current student work samples to determine the quality of student work as measured by teacher created rubrics. All student levels. Classroom, Speciality, and AISTeachers. 8. The SETSS Teacher, Related Service Providers, and the Special Education Network Specialist will provide assistance to teachers upon request in developing and using strategies to help students improve their performance on their daily academic tasks. Students, and Family Members. 9. Teachers, and the Parent Coordinator will provide families with regular, on-going updates via monthly calendars, weekly newsletters, letters home, class websites and the new online program En grade. Families will be informed of student academic progress, upcoming school events, and include strategies for families to use at home to provide academic support to students. Families will also be regularly invited to attend workshops facilitated by the parent coordinator and/or community organizations, visit classrooms, and meet with teachers, Classroom, Speciality, and AISTeachers. 9/5/18 - 6/26/19 Classroom, Speciality, and AISTeachers. Instructional Coaches, AIS Teachers, IEP Coordinator, Educational Consultant, Assistant Principals and Principal 9/5/18 - 6/26/19 Bilingual Coordinator Classroom and Speciality Teachers. SETSS Teacher, Related Service Providers and Special Education Network 9/5/18 - 6/26/19 9/5/18 - 6/26/19 9/5/18 - 6/26/19 Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principals and Principal 7  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Starting in September, Parent Learning Walks will be scheduled for every third Thursday of each month. This will be our fourth year implementing this event. Parents will have the opportunity to visit their child's classroom each month to familiarize themselves with what is being taught. In later months, parents will have the opportunity to visit the grades their children will attend the following year. A reflection sheet is provided for each parent during the walk and their is a debrief session with Administration immediately following, where parents can ask questions, make comments and give feedback. Throughout the year, teachers on each grade level meet with parent groups to give them strategies and insight as to how they can help their child at home. In grades 3-5 administration and testing coordinator will conduct workshops specific to the NYS tests. Instructional coaches will host a series of early literacy workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will be given time and resources to ensure aligned curriculum in the form of professional development during contractual after school PD time and during scheduled common planning time. Professional development will be given by administration, coaches and teachers who are turn keying specific information from workshops they have attended. The RTI team will be used to pull students who are in need or at risk. Professional development will be used to ensure standardized and aligned reading goals. Schedules will be made to allow for teacher teams to engage in common planning. Professional development will be done to assist teachers with effective data inquiry processes. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. All activities will be monitored on a monthly basis by the instructional team in order to identify 1/3 of the population within our school who made the least amount of progress. These students will receive academic intervention targeted to fit their needs for a cycle of 6-8 weeks. Through our school based protocol, midpoint progress will be evaluated. ELA/Math Diagnostics, running records report will be utilized to indicate school progress toward goals. Sign in sheets and agendas from common planning meetings will be reviewed and discussed in midyear meetings with teachers. These meetings will also include feedback on the impact of these common planning sessions 8  within the classroom. Additionally, coaches, administration, and consultants will meet every other week to debrief on common planning and discuss any questions, concerns and next steps. 1) CCLS - Aligned Fall Benchmark - English Language Arts & Mathematics: December/January 2) CCLS - Aligned Spring Benchmark - English Language Arts & Mathematics: February/March 3) CCLS - Mathematics Benchmark: October 4) Dates of Running Records Tracking/Assessments:  October 2018  December 2018 January 2019   March 2019  June 2019 5) Periodic Assessment for English Language Learners - Grades 3rd, 4th and 5th: October and May 6) By February 1, 2019, as mid-point benchmark, 100% of the teachers and staff will engage in progress monitoring to ensure the continuous improvement planning by evaluating ELA/Math Diagnostics administered at the beginning of the year and utilize the data to drive instruction and frequent formative assessments for the remainder of the year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Benchmark Assessments, Progress Monitoring Protocol, Formative assessments (Go Math Prerequisite test), standards based rubrics coupled with school based norming protocol to assess student work. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The school has transitioned back to a Workshop Teaching-centered model for instruction and a structured comprehensive Literacy Block, which incorporates multiple opportunities for students to take academic risks and engage in small group activities that will increase student achievement. All identified instructional shifts will continue to take place at the school in reading and writing to maintain a high level of instruction for students across the school, students will have multiple opportunities to engage in instruction that addresses reading skills and overall reading ability as measured by TCRWP Running Records. While the school decreased in Level 1s in Grades 3, 4, & 5 on the NYS ELA (8.5% decrease from the previous year) & Mathematics (11% decrease) Exams, there is still must be an increased amount of work to move students from Level 2 into Levels 3s & 4s. In addition, students in Grades K-5 need to demonstrate they are reading at grade level or above grade level utilizing TCRWP Running Records. Instructional methods will continue to focus on increasing small group instructional opportunities. Guided Reading will remain the focal point of the Balanced Literacy Block. These instructional methods will benefit students who need support to achieve proficiency in grade level reading standards. The school has embraced various instructional methods and initiatives to develop lifelong readers, which include but are not limited to: Independent Reading, use of Leveled Classroom Libraries, Running Records, Reading Conferences. Moreover, these instructional practices are consistently being reviewed and revised to continuously support each individual student and their diverse learning needs, with a specific focus on these subgroups: English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities and the students identified in the bottom one-third, as well as, students identified as reading below level. P.S. 173's Faculty and Staff take specific measures to promote a safe learning environment for all students. The Guidance Counselor facilitates Respect for All workshops for all students across the school. The Guidance Counselor is a resource available to students who demonstrate a need for short term or long term intervention. These services provide opportunities for students who are referred either through a teacher, parent or family member. Moreover, we have created a new initiative called "Brighten a P.S. 173 Star." Classroom teachers identified two to three students in their class that would benefit from additional social emotional behavioral support from other colleagues in our school. Mentoring points, include but are not limited to: Being honest and trustworthy to all their peers and the faculty and staff in our school, when a situation becomes a problem, solving it in a positive manner and reinforcing conflict resolution strategies, what it means to be kind and respectful, listening to their teachers... They hold the key to your success! 0  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of Teachers and Support Staff will meet for common planning (twice weekly), to improve academics for all students, including students with disabilities and emergent bilingual students as a result of student work analysis. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Teachers will engage in Professional Learning activities on Monday or Tuesday afternoons or during Common Planning time to develop school-wide "norms" that raise the level of consistency with the administration of Running Records across the school. All Students K-5 9/5/18 - 6/26/19 2. The Staff Developer and Teachers will utilize the Common Core Library for standards-based literacy tasks or exemplars as a measure for student performance and progress with an emphasis on reading. All Students K-5 9/5/18 - 6/26/19 3. The Staff Developer and school leaders will support the teachers with Professional Learning activities aligned with student data analysis for the purpose of setting short term goals that meet the student’s academic needs. Teachers College All Students K-5 9/5/18 - 6/26/19 Running Records will be one item utilized for identifying goals for students. 4. The Staff Developers and school leaders will support teachers with Professional Learning activities in the creation of standards-based tasks that support students’ short term goals. All Students K-5 9/5/18 - 6/26/19 5. Teachers will be supported by the Staff Developers, Literacy Consultant and Administration in the formation and implementation of lessons prepared using the school’s reading and writing program with a particular emphasis of the unique needs of ELL students (i.e. How classroom environment and All Students K-5 9/5/18 - 6/26/19 Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff Developers, Lead Teachers, Literacy Consultant, Classroom and Specialty Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff Developers, Lead Teachers, Literacy Consultant, Classroom and Specialty Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff Developers, Lead Teachers, Literacy Consultant, Classroom and Specialty Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff Developers, Lead Teachers, Literacy Consultant, Classroom and Specialty Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff Developers, Lead Teachers, Literacy Consultant, 2 learning scaffolds can enhance the learning outcome for students identified as ENL Classroom and Specialty Teachers promote learning independence. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. To maintain and increase family engagement, administration, faculty, staff and the Parent Coordinator will work together to ensure parental involvement by strategicaly planning events, workshops, etc.The school website, calls to thouroughly inform families of events. opportunities to volunteer, workshops, teacher contacts. access to their child's data and more. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to ensure a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported and challenged by their teachers and peers, the following human resources include but are not limited to: Principal, Assistant Principals, Lead Teachers, Social Worker, School Psychologist, (2) AIS Teachers, Special Education Liaison, ELL Coordinator, Classroom Teachers and Ancillary Staff. All staff personnel schedules were adjusted and time maximized , as needed. Additional Instructional resources will be utilized to enhance the school/classroom environment, specifically, Books/Novels for Classrooms, School Library and Guided Reading Groups. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, 100% of Teachers will receive feedback to ensure that teacher practice will result in positive student outcomes. In February 2019, as a mid-point benchmark, 100% of Teachers will receive feedback from mock Quality Review (PPO), conducted by Administration, utilizing the Quality Review Rubric as the assessment tool to ensure school progress and increase positive student outcomes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson rubric/QR rubric, coaching cycles centered around teacher need and feedback. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on school administrators’ PPO visits, the feedback and observations from the 2017-18 school year, it was noted that while encouraging self-reflection and identifying effective pedagogical practices could potentially lead to improved student learning outcomes, to be effective in the classroom they must be formally and systemically integrated into a curriculum and into the professional learning plan. It is necessary to develop and maintain strong curriculum that aligns to CCLS and promotes higher order thinking skills. We will teach to these standards in order for our students to receive rigorous instruction that effectively prepares our students to achieve proficiency as indicated by the state exam. As evidenced by early data collection, fourth grade units are being developed with an attention to increasing the rigor of comprehension strategies. Kindergarten, first, second, and third grade units are being revised with a focus on organization and ideas. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 95% of teachers, having participated in ongoing Professional Development and Inquiry Team Meetings, with a focus on specific types of teaching strategies, which include student collaboration, met cognition, discursive classrooms, understanding student thinking and computer based learning, as evidenced by teacher feedback in Advance, which in turn, will increase student achievement. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Mid-year conversations with teachers to monitor their progress towards specified types of teaching strategies. School leaders will mobilize staff developers and an educational consultant to provide additional support to teachers in the areas of using data to drive instruction, plan and pose DOK level 3 and 4 questions that lead to student-led discussions, form student groups based on reading and math baseline assessments, and best practices for increasing family participation. Staff developers and school administrators will regularly follow up with workshop participants to ensure implementation of best instructional teaching strategies. During parent workshops facilitated by teachers, the parent coordinator, and community social workers, parents will learn how increasing student collaboration and metacognition impacts their children's ability to engage in critical thinking, which in turn, will increase their academic achievement. Parents will also learn strategies for continuing these life long learning skills at home. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Instructional Staff, and parents. 9/5/18 - 6/26/19 Principal, Assistant Principals and Staff Developers Parents 9/5/18 - 6/26/19 Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Lead Teachers, Staff Developers Principal and Assistant Principals. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. A Parent Engagement Committee has been formed by teachers. This committee has a common goal-to plan activities and opportunities to increase parental involvement The committee will meet bi weekly on Tuesday afternoons to plan and carry out the ideas proposed by the members and administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The following human resources will be utilized to assist and guide teachers to remain committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and the school: Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff Developer and Literacy Consultant (25 days) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 5  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. As part of progress monitoring, the following systems are put in place:  Daily classroom visits and walk-throughs Instructional Cabinet Meetings (monthly)   Mid-point benchmark - January 2019  Common Planning Periods  Professional Development Opportunities  Chancellor's Conference Days Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. At the conclusion of 6-8 week units, debrief sessions will serve as the assessment for the impact of each curriculum. These meetings will include analysis of student work, discussion about next steps and revisions of the curriculum moving forward. Mid line performance tasks in writing will also serve as a mid point benchmark for progress in literacy. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on student performance trends, PPO and Quality Review feedback, we have collaborated to create and instructional focus that is tailored to meet the needs of the students in our school: Students will be challenged cognitively through a curriculum that has been developed by a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best and the analysis of data. Students will engage in a high level of instruction that aligns to the instructional shifts and the CCLS, meeting the needs of all learners, giving each multiple opportunities to succeed. They will reflect on their learning and are prepared to justify their response to what they are learning. “We read, we listen, we learn, we think, we talk, we question, we prove, we respond, we revise our thoughts, we understand.” Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of Teachers will meet with the Administration, at least 3 times, to discuss student data and professional goals based on Danielson’s Framework for Teaching/Advance. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Our curriculum will be developed, reflecting the instructional focus, providing PD around the instructional focus as well as coaching cycles, targeting specific teachers and practice. Teaching Staff/Administration/Instructional coaches, ELL Providers/A.I.S Providers 9/5/18 - 6/26/19 All teachers will participate in professional development cohorts monthly facilitated by administration. Teacher coaching cycles based on individual teacher goals will provide support and track teacher growth, 9/5/18 - 6/26/19 Administration, Grade Team Leaders and Staff Developers Administration, Grade, Team Leaders and Staff Developers Administration will participate in Teacher Effectiveness Training. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. As mentioned before, Parent Learning Walks will continue to be scheduled for every third Thursday of each month with a debrief session with administration immediately following. Additionally, as an expanding school, we continue to encourage and recognize the value of parental involvement in their children's education. Parent feedback shows a trend in parents' wanting to continue and expand their opportunities to collaborate with the school on activities for their children as well as their own development. Parents will engage in 3, 8 week cycles of learning around nutrition. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 8  Human resources will include the following : Faculty, Staff, Administration, Instructional coaches, ELL Providers and A.I.S Teachers, Administration and coaches will be involved in planning and goal setting with teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. As stated, during daily classroom visits and walk through, student outcomes and school performance will be progress monitored. In February 2019, as a mid-point benchmark, administration will conduct a mock Quality Review utilizing the Quality Review Rubric as the assessment tool, including feedback from the Quality Review from school year 2016-17, to ensure the school progress toward the meeting the specified goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. All teachers and administrators will utilize data to drive instruction and the needs of the individual students, to create curricula across all subject areas which include the Common Core Learning Standards for each specific grade. By the end of the year, June 26, 2019, 80% of the students will meet or exceed the Common Core Learning Standards for their specific grade. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  98 % of families have indicated they are satisfied with the education their child is receiving at P.S. 173.  P.S. 173 will use designated time on Tuesday afternoons to raising the level of Family Engagement for all  families. Staff will engage in aggressive outreach to engage all families in Parent Teacher Conferences at least twice during the course of the school year to discuss academic, social, and emotional growth. As an expanding school, we encourage and recognize the value of parent involvement in their children's education. We will establish a culture pf parental involvement in order for our students to be and feel supported at home in achieving their academic goals. They will also aid in supporting our students in their social-emotional development and growth. Parent feedback has shown a trend in parents' wanting to continue and expand their opportunities to collaborate with the school on activities for the children and for parent development through workshops and classes. We will continue to focus on the need to increase parent involvement as evidenced by parent sign in sheets, school surveys and feedback. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P.S. 173 will engage 100% of families in at least two Parent Teacher Conferences in order to increase parental involvement as measured by the signatures on teacher logs. In addition, by June 2019, we will have at least 20-25% of parents present at each PA meeting through encouragement of parental participation. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A Parental Involvement Committee will be developed to identify ways to raise the level of activities occurring on Tuesday afternoons. This committee will meet monthly to develop ways to engage more families at more regular intervals over the course of the school year. We will encourage families to establish ongoing communication with the school regarding student progress towards meeting school standards and expectations, disciplinary concerns and ways to best support their children's development. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Pre-K - 5 Families 2018-19 Parent Coordinator, Administrators, Faculty and Staff 2018-19 Parent Coordinator, Administrators, Faculty and Staff Outreach to parents to notify them of upcoming events will include notices in both English and Spanish, emails, Learn boost, phone calls and news letters 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. America Scores, Turn 2 U Sports Program, Accelerated Reading Program : Classrooms, Inside Broadway & Ballroom Dancing Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To maintain and increase family engagement Administrators, Faculty, Staff and the Parent Coordinator will work together to ensure parental involvement. Our school website (PS173m.com) was created to keep parents informed of all the wonderful learning experiences and upcoming school events throughout the year. Additionally, the Parent Coordinator will be involved in parent outreach and meetings to ensure collaboration. Weekly parent engagement meetings will take place to keep parents informed and involved in the school culture. 1  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administration, Faculty, Staff and the Parent Coordinator will utilize every Tuesday after school from 2:35 to 3:50 for parent outreach. Parent outreach will include but are not limited to phone calls, meetings, class newsletters and workshops. In addition, the following meetings have been scheduled to monitor the school progress towards the specific goal: September 2018 – Family Night November 2018 – Evening/Afternoon Parent-Teacher Conferences March 2019 – Evening/Afternoon Parent-Teacher Conferences (Mid-point Benchmark) May 2019 – Evening Parent-Teacher Conferences The progress of this goal will be monitored through parent sign in sheets. Additionally, through the collaboration with the PA, we will encourage parents to become more involved in the school community as evidenced by who attends. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Survey, increased parental involvement and participation in school wide events Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) E.L.A Assessment 2018-R.T.I Math Assessment 2018-R.T.I Science Assessment 2018-R.T.i R.T.I At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Guidance Counselor – At Risk crisis counseling I.E.P Teacher – At Risk Groups Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Interactive writing, guided reading, Wilson Reading Program and Accelerated Reader Math consultant Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group/ Tier I and Tier II During school/After school Small group/one-to-one/ Tier I and Tier II During school/After school Push-in/consultation Small group/one-to-one/ Tier I and Tier II During school/After school Push-in/consultation Small group/one-to-one/ Tier I and Tier II During school/After school Push-in/consultation Small group/individual During school/After school 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 24 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Counseling, provide uniforms and school supplies Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teachers are recruited from colleges which have distinguished Teacher Education Programs. We have developed partnerships with Columbia University, N.Y.U, Bank Street and Ford ham University for this purpose. New teachers are mentored by staff developers and exemplary teachers. Teachers attend high quality professional development offered by the Department of Education, Teachers College and curriculum consultants. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development has been integrated into our school culture. The information learned through these opportunities for teacher learning and success is turn keyed to staff. It is expected that staff members in turn implement what was presented into their class in a way that will suit the needs of their students. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We will continue to deliberate in how we support our teachers so that they continue to strive to be Highly Effective Teachers. They will participate in in-house professional development, led by administration, coaches, lead teachers and consultants. Additionally, they will attend professional development hosted by the DOE in specific areas relevant to their teaching practice such as gaining a deeper understanding on how to align instruction to the C.C.L.S, creating C.C.L.S assessments, using their data to differentiate instruction for ENL learners and S.W.D. We will encourage our staff to attend workshops that will benefit them and in turn, improve academic performance for our students. We will ensure that our high quality teachers remain in our school by creating a professional learning environment that is safe, respectful and challenging; and by creating a school culture that values collaboration and learning, offers relevant professional development opportunities for professional growth, and multiple opportunities for staff to contribute to our school development. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 6  n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). .n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Many of our students transition from our school’s Pre-Kindergarten program. Pre-K students engage in the Creative Curriculum throughout the year but have exposure to Kindergarten level activities and routines in late Spring as a means of preparing for Fall enrollment. In order to promote critical thinking and student discussion, Pre-Kindergarten students will participate in Read-Aloud that include questioning and the opportunity to Turn and Talk to their partners. Socialization through organized play and center based learning will develop expressive ability that will ease the transition into Kindergarten. Fine and gross motor skills will strengthen through activities designed for this purpose. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The use of multiple assessments is discussed at grade level meeting conducted by teacher staff developers and assistant principals. Teachers develop C.C.S.S. aligned rubrics to measure writing and performance tasks; determine composition of E.L.A and Mathematics portfolios and create interim assessments. Teachers work together with administration, instructional coaches and the data specialist to select and implement appropriate multiple assessment measures. Teachers participate on M.O.S.L committees, data inquiry teams and assessment selection and revision during common planning meetings. Professional development is provided by administration, coaches and the Department of Education Early Childhood Offices. Additionally, data inquiry based on students assessments is done in common planning during each unit and school wide after benchmark assessments in September, January and June. These inquiry sessions are facilitated by administration and the data specialist and afford teachers the opportunity to analyze assessment results, identify strengths and identify areas of need with next steps for further planning. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and 7  purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 285,646 138,869 12,366 Pending 2,345,849 X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) section 5a-5e section 5a-5e section 5a-5e section 5a-5e section 5a-5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 8  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 173, in compliance with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school's policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. The school's Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school's Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 0  Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 173 will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child's progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school's Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school's Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school's Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school's Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents' capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school's Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school's educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;   1   conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children's progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 173, in compliance with the Every Student Succeeds Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State's Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships    conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child's achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school's Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 2  respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child's education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child's teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child's class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child's progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department's General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (E.S.E.A) and Title I programs. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child's attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;    3   promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child's school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child's education;  communicate with my child's teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school's Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   III. Student Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities:       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 4 0 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: studies studies studies Commencing The objective of P.S. 173 is to ensure that all of the immigrant students attending our school achieve a successful academic and social learning experience. When such goals are accomplished, it equips the students with academic content and social skills to function effectively in the classroom and outside of school in any type of social setting. Using this process of goal setting and creating expectations, students experience quality education delivered through appropriate instructional practices and assessment measures. To provide students with such quality education, this direct instruction supplemental program will be aimed at the third through fifth grade. Entering,, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding level students as per the NYSESLAT 2016 and NYSITEL exam results will be offered this program. PS 173 will offer an after-school program which began on September 11 through May 20, 2018, for a total of 42 sessions.The program will consist of two classes, with twenty students per class, there will be two Common Branch teachers and two certified ESL/Bilingual teachers. The ESL teachers will push-in using the team teaching model. Additionally, students will engage in the Accelerated Reading Program, working with IPads in learning stations. Furthermore, through team teaching, students will be immersed in tiered vocabulary to support their language development and enhance their comprehension. The goal of this program will be to provide students with the needed academic support so they achieve academic gains to succeed in the area of literacy, math, science and social studies. Our concentration will be immersing students in the English language as well as preparing our students with the necessary skills to achieve success in these areas. We will provide students with the skills to increase their vocabulary, listening, speaking as well as reading and writing skills. The program will take place after school hours, time of instruction will be 2:45 pm - 3:45 pm. on Wednesdays and Thursdays. The program will be conducted in English, with a strong emphasis on the use of ESL strategies and methodologies. We will be using a wide variety of teacher made material to assist our students and make sure they reach their highest potential. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration  topics to be covered 6  Part C: Professional Development  name of provider Begin description here: mathematicians mathematicians The academic success of our students will be possible through the collaborative support of all staff members . Along with the ESL/bilingual teacher and the bilingual coordinator, this special team will provide support to all teachers in this program. Working collaboratively, the staff will work in finding and implementing the best teaching practices that meet the students’ learning needs and learning styles, there is an emphasis on differentiated instruction for our ELLs. This team will meet Tuesdays after school for 45 minutes to discuss different strategies and teaching techniques as well as to plan cooperatively for the week. Colleagues will exchange meaningful ideas during these planning sessions. Together we will plan reading, writing, listening, speaking, proper use of grammar, predicting, clarifying, questioning, the use of testing vocabulary and language, summarizing, finding cause and effect and relationship strategies. The use of ESL standards and methodologies are applied in all lessons, to improve literacy and mathematics skills, during the after school instructional hours while using the Common Core Standards. Using bilingual and ESL strategies will help make transitions to the next level easier for our ELL students. This PD will positively impact the progress of ELLS by providing them with the strategies they need in order to be successful learners. As part of the plan, small group instruction will be provided in order to meet the individual needs of the students and target their growth as readers, writers and mathematicians. The providers will be, the Bilingual Coordinator and a Bilingual Teacher, both are certified Bilingual Elementary Education teachers. A high priority will be given to best approaches and teaching practices that should be implemented in order to meet the learning needs of all immigrant students. Our Title III staff will receive training on, How to Develop the Listening Skills of ELLs, How to Differentiate Questions to a Group of ELLs, Reading Strategies for ELLs, How to Develop Writing Skills to Ensure a Positive Outcome on the NYSESLAT. NYSELA and NYS Mathematics Assessments. Each topic will take approximately 2-3 weeks to cover it will occur during the mandated professional development period. We will maintain records using agendas and maintaining attendance sign in sheets. As part of our professional development teachers and staff are provided with opportunities to ask questions, and voice specific concerns. Attendance sheets and agendas will be kept in order to maintain records of these meetings taking place. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: 7  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities An integral part at P.S. 173, is parental involvement. The Bilingual Coordinator invites parents to attend a parent orientation, which provides an overview of the New York City public education system, the school’s expectations and their role as parents in their child's development. Meetings and workshops for parents are provided throughout the year, to help them understand how to assist their children in all subject areas and with scholastic needs. The Bilingual Coordinator, along with the ESL teacher, and Math/ELA coach, provide parents with materials and strategies to assist their children in the areas of Language Arts and Mathematics. Topics to be covered include Child Development, Reading to your Child in the Native Language, Using the Public Library to Promote Reading and Writing in English and the Native Language, Helping Your Child To Read, Know What To Expect on the State Exams, NYS-ELA, NYS-Mathematics, NYS Science Assessment, and NYSITEL. P.S. 173 will hold one workshop per month, each session will be approximately one hour in length. There will be a total of 1 workshop a month, held Parents will be given informational material in their native language to facilitate their understanding of the school’s expectations. Students will take notifications of these workshops home in form of letters and it will also be posted on our Monthly School Calendar. In the cases where parents can not attend the meetings or workshops, the material presented is sent home the following day with students in their native language. We will also provide workshops to assist parents with the needs of their children, providing them with organizations and activities that are available to them in the neighborhood. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials. 8  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 06 School Name P.S. 173 Borough Manhattan School Number 173 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Rachael Garcia Coach Tanya Serraty ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Miriam Montalvo/Maria Zenoz Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Jose Rodriguez Related-Service Provider Jose Colon/IEP/SETTS Superintendent Manuel Ramirez Assistant Principal Kevin Goodman, Natalie Zeno, Coach type here School Counselor Isabel Stoll Parent Carolyn Hidalgo Parent Coordinator Wandalys Torres Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 529 0 Total number of ELLs 97 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 18.34%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 1 0 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 1 0 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS 173 uses NYSITELL results, NYSESLAT results, Ready Gen Assessments, Running Records, TCRWP, conferencing notes, teacher observation of ELLs, for all grades and Periodic Assessments . The data allows us to see the improvements the ELLs are experiencing as well as areas where we need to focus such as reading comprehension and writing skills. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our ELL program is evaluated on the gains made in the NYSESLAT, ELA and Science tests. We also look at the gains made in Performance Assessments and Ready Gen Assessments and teacher made assessments. 1  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] For those ELL's who score below the the specified levels of performance on the annual english language proficiency assessment we assist our students with RTI and AIS support services. Students are being serviced daily by both the coach and a push-in/push-out teacher. We look closely at parental requests, samples of the students' work in both English and their native language. We use data provided by the NYS-ELA/Math, Science and in house assessments. ENL Teacher and content area teacher observations and recommendations are also taken in account. We look for SIFE students among our population as well as students that have or are suspected of having a disability. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data reveals that students in the lower grades Kindergarten, first and second grades tend to do extremely well on both the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. These students usually achieve proficiency in one to three years. In the upper grades, students do well in the Speaking and Listening Subtests but tend to need more skills in the Reading and Writing Subtests. We have a very large population of student that are in the Transitioning, Advanced and Commanding levels. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students are grouped together by grades, (Grades 1, 2 and 3) and administered standalone ENL for 180 minutes per week and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA, Science or Social Studies in a collaboraative approach with the ESL licensed teacher and a K-6 certified elementary school teacher. Regardless oas to whether a student is proficient or advanced, students will receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL but will not participate in the standalone program. b. TBE program. If applicable. Students in transitional bilingual classes are traveling together as a group( Grade K) and (Grades 4 and 5 together) . They will receive 110 minutes of standalone ENL by a certified ESOL teacher and 115 minutes integrated ENL. Funding does not allow for enough coverages as we have only one ESOL teacher. c. DL program. If applicable. Not Applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All staff involved in ENL receives a schedule that they must adhere to developed by the ENL team. 2  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL strategies and methodologies as well as scaffolding are incorporated into the integrated programs that meet the demands of the Common Core Learning STandards in the subject areas of ELA, Scienceand Social Studies. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Teacher made assessments and ELL Periodic Assessments give clear results as to what gains the students are making. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differenntiating instruction for the differrent types of students allows for language development and understanding. Students are not categorized by the different ELL subgroups but on the level they are performing. In the classroom, small groups are created and individualized instuction is used. The use of support services such as RTI and AIS teachers, school literacy coach and the ENL teachers support the students in all of these areas. Teachers meet and devise plans of instructions for the differet ELL subgroups. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? A combination of programs and materials are used Ready Gen and Teacher's College Readers and Writers Workshop models and Go Mathematics. Scaffolding and differentiation, small group instruction as well as hands on approaches are used to provide and accelerate the English language development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In conjunction with the Special Education Department in our school, using the students' IEP's, SETTs providers, content area teachers and ENL teachers set short term goals in order to achieve the student's IEP goals and attain English proficiency. Students are grouped with general education students, taking into account their IEP group mandates. We do not place any restrictions on our SWDs. These students are part of the school family and are treated as such. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We offer a push-in and/or pull-out program provided by the Mathematics and Language Arts Coach. ELL's are also provided services targeting students in the beginner and intermediate levels and those who scored 1-2in the ELA and Math . These students are provided the services by the Coach, AIS teacher and RTI teacher. Those ELL's scoring advanced and 3-4 respectively in the NYSELA and Math Assessments receive small group instruction also. Entering and Emerging students are provided mathematics intervention programs in their native language (Spanish) when required. Other intervention services are provided by our Gym cluster teacher, who also provides instruction in their native language (Spanish) when needed or when stduents need clarification. Native language support is given to our students by the bilingual staff and the ESL teacher. 3  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year, 2015-16 we are excited about the implementation and use of Ready Gen and Teacher's College Workshop models. We will be using the best of both programs and implementing them. This new language arts program that we are implementing this year we believe will have a great impact on our ENL students. Besides a new language arts program we will be using Go Math.We will be implementing s Saturday prorgsm for all of our students. The ENL are included in the Saturday Academy program. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not planning to discontinue any of the programs or services for our ENL students. However, we will no longer be using Ready Gen as our only reading and writing program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELL's are afforded equal access to all school programs and activities. They receive the same letters to take home with the appropriate translations. They are also provided the same opportunity to join after school learning programs, such as remedial mathematics or Language Arts as well as our Saturday Acadamy and any sport related activity, such as soccer, basketball, baseball, cheerleading, and track . There is no question of what their ELL status is to be included in these programs, services and activities. We embrace all of our students and offer them equal oppoortunity always. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. PS 173 uses technology in every classroom throughout our building. Classrooms are equipped with a minimum of 2 computers per room. Computer lab period/periods are programed into their schedule. Teachers, ESL teachers, AIS and RTI specialists work in jointly to implement and support one another in the classroom and in the lab. Computers, laptops and tablets are used. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Since we utilize the 25% Bilingual Transitional program at the school, it allows the bilingual teacher to reinforce the native language instruction as required per mandates. The use of the native language in the classroom validates students’ language and culture while enhancing their self-esteem. Whether students are placed in a Transitional Bilingual classroom or a Free Standing ESL Program the primary objective is to increase English language learners proficiency as they meet or exceed The Common Core Standards. Scaffolding academic language, visuals and/or relia, physical expression; ESL integration through the arts, technology in all subject areas are among the techniques teachers use. This collaboration also ensures a unified approach to curriculum areas of instruction while incorporating various scaffolding strategies (for e.g. bridging, contextualization, schema building, and modeling).The following is part of the daily practice of the ESL program at PS 173: small group instruction while addressing students’ individual needs. The integration of ELL youngsters into mainstream classrooms enable teachers to provide them with the daily employment of comprehensive instructional approach to math and reading using the Ready Gen Reading Prorgam with the supoort of TCRWP (Teacher's College Reading and Writing Program. The continuous program implementation of ESL methodologies through the daily teaching of students such as listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills are reinforced in the English language and content areas. In addition, the ESL teacher works collaboratively with classroom teachers, provides support with specific ESL approaches and appropriate second language acquisition activities to meet students’ linguistic needs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELL students at PS 173 are provided the mandated services and time allocated for these services. There is no difference in regards to grade or age of the ELL students serviced. All staff members have schedules that must be adhered to daily. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? PS 173 uses technology in every classroom throughout our building. Classrooms are equipped with a minimum of 2 computers per room. Computer lab period/periods are programed into their schedule. Teachers, ESL teachers, AIS and RTI specialists 4  work in jointly to implement and support one another in the classroom and in the lab. Computers, laptops and tablets are used. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students who are newcomers to PS 173 are welcomed and nurtured by the entire school family. Their native language is identified upon registration, so adults and children from the same language background within the school can provide linguistic support to those students. Such communication facilitates their transition to the school system. As part of the transition, the parent coordinator, bilingual coordinator and the ESL teacher meet with parents of newcomers. During meetings, the parents are equipped with skills that enable them to better assist their youngsters to make a transition to the school. Also, as part of the training parents receive general information about the school and relevant details pertaining to their child’s current class expectations. Throughout the school day, students who are newcomers receive ongoing academic and social support by our Administrative team, classroom teachers, Bilingual Coordinator, the ESL teacher, AIS providers, RTI, the school Coach, and SETTS provider and buddy peer tutoring. The ESL and the classroom teachers plan collaboratively on long and short term goals as the students gradually progress from one linguistic stage to the next. Students are integrated in classrooms, small group, push-in/pull-out instruction, and on-going sustained individualized instruction. Buddy/ peer tutors work in concert with teachers, and assist newcomers in learning the basic survival skills, class routines and class assignment whenever possible. Provisions are made for all newcomers to participate in before, after-school and Saturday programs and activities offered in the school. They are also encouraged and given reference to participate in district or regional educational intervention programs designed to meet the academic and transitional needs new arrival immigrants. It is imperative that the academic needs of all ELL students are met, therefore provision is made to foster and enhance their learning. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The language electives offered to the students in this elementary school is Spanish. However, a list of all staff and every adult in the building is kept with all the languages spoken. If a child needs translation in another language, there is staff available who speak many different languages, besides Spanish. For example, French, Arabic, Phillipino, and Chinese are a few of the languages spoken by our staff members to provide support to ELL students and their parents. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The academic success of our students has been possible through the collaborative support of all staff members and professional development for all ELL personnel at the P.S. 173. New teachers receive in house mentoring and (are) assigned a buddy teacher, where on-going sharing of teaching strategies in all content areas promote professional growth. Our staff developers and coach along with the lead teachers provide support to all teachers. The staff works collaboratively in finding and implementing the best teaching practices that meet the students’ learning needs and learning styles. Staff members meet regularly for grade conferences to discuss strategies and teaching techniques. Weekly planning sessions are also scheduled by the teachers. This team effort for planning extends to the weekly after school professional development activities. During 5  these sessions, colleagues across the grade exchange meaningful ideas in all subject areas. Staff members and administrators collaborate and share ideas regularly to focus on school achievement and ensure that we have a communal focus. The staff, TBE teachers, co-teachers, clusters and our of classroom teachers also meets regularly with the Bilingual Coordinator and ESL teacher to promote new ideas, strategies and professional development for the purpose of assisting our ELLs. The school's Bilingual Coordinator and Administrative team meet weekly to provide professional training for the ENL teachers and bilimgual teachers. The DOE Bilingual Department offers an array of material and a wealth of knowledge that is shared with all teachers, ENL and bilingual staff. Regular meetings are held through the Department of Education throughout the year, teachers assist these workshops as well. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. At P.S. 173, teachers of our terminal grade are provided information regarding middle school opportunities for ELLs. Our school district has many specialized middle school programs that are specifically designed to address the learning needs of ELLs and newcomers. Since our instruction for ELLs provided a via standalone/colaborative team teaching model, these students are better equipped, socially and academically to transition into middle school. The staff and administrative team at PS 173 are given the opportunities to receive ELL training through on-sight and off-sight staff development that specifically addresses the needs of our English language learners. Best approaches and teaching practices that should be implemented to meet the learning needs of all ELLS are shared with teachers. Training on how to develop listening, speaking as well as reading and writing skills of ELLs is provided. During the training sessions, opportunities are provided for teachers to ask questions about specific concerns. For the bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of 50% of the required professional development hours will be geared to language acquisition in alignment with core content area of instruction. We will focus on the best practices for co-teaching that focus on strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Records are maintained by keeping agendas and attendence records of all staff who attended are kept in a binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? On going parental involvement is crucial, therefore, parental involvement plays an integral part of PS 173’s ENL program. Parents are invited to attend meetings with teachers on Tuesday afternoons where the teacher and ENL teacher meet with parents to discuss language development process, language proficiency results and discuss ways that the parents can help their children. If parents are not available, phone calls are made and the meeting is held. Annual meetings with ENL parents are held to discuss and provide the parents with information regarding the school’s expectations and their role as parents in support to the school’s effort to provide a quality education to its students as well as their child’s academic progress .Throughout the school year parents attend workshops to help them assist their ELL youngsters with scholastic needs. During various meetings, interpreters are used for parents who do not speak English as a primary language. School staff translation lists allow us for easy access to find the correct interpreter for translation needs. Informational materials are sent home or given to parents in their native language to facilitate their understanding of the school’s expectations. Specialized training, skilled teaching and mastery of the English Language of ELL students, and parental involvement is utilized to promote academic achievement, while meeting the city and state common core standards in reading and math, as well as in other content areas. 6  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The parents of ELL students are always welcome and included in all the activities the school provides. Parents are asked to volunteer time helping in the school, in classrooms, during sports related activities, and during trips. Parents participate in reading and writing celebrations as well as help with practices, food and other aspects. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Rachael Garcia, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 173 School DBN: 06M173 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Rachael Garcia Title Principal Kevin Goodman/Natalie Zeno Assistant Principal Wandalys Torres Parent Coordinator Miriam Montalvo/Maria Zenoz ENL/Bilingual Teacher Carolyn Hidalgo Parent Jose Bain-Colon Teacher/Subject Area Jose Rodriguez/Bilingual Teacher/Subject Area Tanya Serraty Isabel Stoll Manuel Ramirez Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 9  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 06M173 School Name: P.S. 173 Superintendent: Manuel Ramirez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No pending rachael natalie maria pending garcia zeno zenoz parent coordinator principal AP bi lingual corrdinator no no no no no no no no * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When looking at the Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), ATS reports, and Student Emergency cards, the data suggests that our parent community prefers communication to be in English or Spanish. There is a very small percentage of Arabic, Chinese and Hindi students, however, these students have requested communication either oral or written information to be in the English language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 0  Language The preferred language for both written and oral communication by the parents at P.S. 173 is English and Spanish. Written Preferred Percent Written The preferred language written communication by the parents at P.S. 173 is English and Spanish English: 47.73 Spanish: 50.11 Oral Preferred The preferred language for oral communication by the parents at P.S. 173 is English and Spanish Percent Oral English: 47.3 Spanish: 50.54 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. none Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you Parent Notification Letters for ENL and new entrance students September and throughout the year Gifted and Talented Notifications October/November Notifications of trips, entrance or dismissal notifications, school activities, graduation/moving up ceremonies, changes in programming etc. September through June plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translations provided by DOE Translations provided by DOE Translations provided by PS 173 Staff. Our school creates a translation list of all employees in 1  the building and the languages spoken by each person and if they feel comfortable translating documents. Our documents are translated by a group of people to ensure there are no errors in translation. Notifications are on file and reused year after year or they are created a week or two before they are needed. This ensures timely provision of the translated documents to parents. Teachers request translation one week prior to being handed out and our team returns the translated document in a timely fashion. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide The formal face-to-face meetings our school will have will be Back to School Night and Parent Teacher Conferences September 13,2017, November 16, 2017, March 15, 2018 and May 23, 2018 interpretation service(s)? PS 173 provides translation using our translation list. Staff members such as out of classroom teachers, paraprofessionals and school aides are assigned to classrooms for the purpose of translating when needed. Informal interactions / Parent Outreach The guidance counselor calls parents into the building to meet with them as does the parent coordinator and the bilingual coordinator. Tuesday afternoons from 2:25-3:50 pm With the use of our translation list, staff September through June who are able to translate are readily available to assist. Translation is provided by staff members. One of our two school counselors speaks Spanish and can translate for the other counselor when needed. If she is unable to assist, a staff member who is available will translate. Both the parent coordinator and the bilingual coordinator speak Spanish and do not need Spanish translation. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, PS 173 uses a communication strategy where we have created a translation list of all our personnel. At any given time, we know who is in our building and the languages spoken. All of our secretaries and main office personnel speak Spanish and English. In the event of an emergency where parents need to be called, staff will be called to the office and given the classroom emergency cards. We insist that parents provide us with a minimum three telephone numbers in case of an emergency. We also have staff members who speak Arabic, Korean, and Mandarin. We have many offices with phones available; this ensures the families of being notified in a timely fashion and ensures the safety of our students. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Workshops are held throughout the year to ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulations A-663. All of our Limited English Language Speakers are provided the same opportunities as all of the other students in the school. PS 173 does not discriminate against any child entering a program, club, sports, or activities in the school. Limited English Language Speakers have access to all of the programs offered in our building. One example is the use of Renaissance Learning Program; ENL students have the advantage of using the program in Spanish if they are not reading in English. Staff members at PS 173 always provide translation for parents and guardians. We never allow our students to translate any type of information. All of our staff has received training and is aware of the Translation and Interpretation Unit is readily available to them. The parents of PS 173 have received 3  brochures and handouts explaining the availability of Translation and Interpretation Unit. The use of the Translation and Interpretation Unit was explained to parents at Back to School Night and all parents of newly admitted students are provided this information. We will ensure that all staff members are aware of how to use the translation services and the over-the-phone interpretation services by holding a staff meeting and disseminating the information to them Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Welcome posters provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit are hung in the main entrance, the main office, the parent coordinator's room, the bilingual coordinators room and throughout the building. Parent notifications and guides were sent out to parents, the students took notifications home. Language ID Guides were given at the front desk, to our security guards, as well as in the main office and to the parent coordinator to be handed out to parents. At all of the meetings provided to parents of PS 173 students, meetings are held in both English and Spanish. In the case of a parent who does not speak either language, we do everything in our power to provide translation. Our parents are well informed of the services provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit and know how to reach them if need be. We ensure that all staff members are aware of how to use the translation services and the over-the-phone interpretation services by holding a staff meeting and disseminating the information to them Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At PS 173, we gather feedback from the parent surveys as well as by having conversations with our parents and discussing their needs and wants. Teacher recommendations are also taken into account. We have used parent feedback to improve language services. We use the Translation List created in our building and try to have as many staff members available to assist Limited English Proficient parents during meetings, workshops, parent-teacher conferences etc. 4 
