 01M184 School Name: P.S. 184M SHUANG WEN Principal: IRIS CHIU   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 01M184 Shuang Wen School 310100010184 Pre-K to 8 327 Cherry Street, New York, NY 10002 212-602-9700 Phone Number: 212-602-9764 Fax: Iris Y. Chiu IChiu@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 01 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Iris Y. Chiu Kevin Yuhas Gael Zafranyand Marc Simmons Ee Tay N/A N/A District Information Carry Chan Superintendent: 166 Essex Street, New York, NY 10001 CChan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-353-2948 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 Seventh Ave, 8 th FL, New York NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Iris Y. Chiu Kevin Yuhas Marc Simmons Ee Tay Lulu Song Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent   Name MenelleSebastien LIllianChen Jane Korach LiyunZou Yvonne Chin MeeKwong Samantha Leung Kimberly Callaway Sarah Raykthsum Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Shuang Wen School incorporates a dual language and dual culture approach with parental involvement and community support to prepare our children to attain the highest standards in an increasingly global society.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Shuang Wen School has been building a “50-50 Two-Way Total Immersion Chinese-English Dual Language” Program one grade at a time since 2011. For the school year 2018-2019, our Dual Language Program will grow to include grades K to 8. Shuang Wen School has a partnership with DYCD sponsored APEX for Youth After School Program to provide academic support and life skills in youth development to support our students, grades K-8, and Chinatown Manpower (CMP) Afterschool Program will provide Chinese Language Academic support to students Pre-K to 8. The strengths of the school are parent involvement, commitment to students’ academic learning, and high academic performance across all subject areas. For the fifth year in a row, Shuang Wen School has been recognized as a “Reward School” by the New York State Department of Education, acknowledged as a school with success in closing achievement gaps and educational excellence. 64.8% of Shuang Wen students met grade standards in the NYS CCLS Standardized ELA tests, while the New York City average was 28%. 78.5% of our students met grade level standards in NYS CCLS standardized Math tests, while the NYC average was 34%. The ELL and English-dominant students in our Dual Language Program classes out-performed English-only monolingual classes in both NYS CCLS Standardized ELA and Math tests. Student demographic at Shuang Wen School has changed in the past few years. The percentages of ELLs and SWD have increased drastically. From 2011 to 2018, the percentage of ELLs increased from around 10% to 17.4% (if includes former ELLs who tested out in NYSESLAT in the last two years, close to 50% of our students are either ELL or former ELLs), and the percentage of SWD increased from 3% to now around 16.1%, which is an evidence of our successful interventions and academic support to SWD by decreasing our students of SWD from 22% two years ago. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Other challenge we have been facing is working with diverse student population that include increasing number of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Another challenge is that most new middle students entering Shuang Wen School do not have strong Chinese language background, and it caused more challenges for students of Chinese Language Learners who try to get on the same level of Chinese Language Proficiency with the students who have been studying Chinese since Elementary School. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The areas our school made the most progress were Supportive Environment and Trust. In our most recent School Quality Review, we received "Well-developed" rating in the indicator 1.4 of Framework for Great School, for "Maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults." 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 01M184 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 684 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 13 11 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 39 26 12 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 68.0% % Attendance Rate 60.5% % Reduced Lunch 15.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 13.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 7.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.26 2% 32% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 72.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 100% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 104 102 5 97.5% 7.2% 16.5% 3.7% 69.4% 6.1% 4 14% 4.1 81.0% 83% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017 ELA CCLS standardized assessments and Quality Review, there appears to be a need to improve teachers' pedagogy and instructional practices in the classrooms. The most recent Quality Review Report indicated that some teachers need to improve their instructional core by "develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products.". Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, every teacher will receive professional development opportunities in their subject area at least once by actively participate and lead Professional Learning activities/cycles in the school, receive individualized coaching, attend professional learning workshops/conferences within New York City, or participate in model classroom inter-visitations or site visits. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Research and provide professional learning Teachers opportunities and activities that help teachers learn the various strategies in meeting the needs of all learners, including students with disabilities, English language learners, students in Temporary Housing and students with interrupted formal education. Sep 2018 -June 2019 Professional Learning Committee (PLC) ● Arrange Professional Learning opportunity and secure necessary funding to allow teachers to learn and engage in practical and meaningful professional learning. Teachers, Guidance Counselors, and Paraprofessionals Sep 2018 – June 2019  Provide time, coaches and resources/material for Teachers more individualized professional learning opportunities and turn-key to the rest of teaching staff. Sep 2018- June 2019 School Administrators, Teacher Leaders, and Teachers Teachers, Teacher Team Leaders, and Administrators  Purchase professional books related to improving Teachers teacher's instruction that are aligned to the curricula, improve student engagement, and meeting the needs of all learners. Sep 2018 - June 2019 Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Teachers will help parents understand school and teachers' academic expectations by inviting all parents to attend curriculum night in September.  Parent Coordinator will work with teachers and provide monthly newsletter to parents, informing parents what the classes are working on in the core curricula. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 3  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Tax levy to support model teachers and model classrooms as the lab site for professional learning. 2. NYSTL for purchasing core curriculum and books in support of students with disabilities, English Language Learners, SIFE, and STH. 3. Title I and Title III (Professional Development) funds for purchasing professional learning books/research material. 4. Title I fund for hiring instructional coaches in Literacy and Math. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  50% of the teachers will have attended at least one professional learning opportunity by February 2019.  By February 2019, 50% of teachers will have visited and conducted learning observation in the exemplary classroom with a mentor teacher or model teacher. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) By June 2019, more than 50% of classrooms have implemented multiple entry points curricula which are aligned with the teacher designed curricula in ATLAS and, more than 80% of students will have reached benchmark per the teacher-created benchmark assessments in ELA/Math, measured by the reviews of ATLAS and end of unit benchmark assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the students' data, more than 34% of our student population is either ELL or former ELL in past two years who are still entitled to ENL services, and more than 50% are former ELL who tested out more than 3 years ago and still need support in English reading and writing. More than 20% of our students are students with learning disabilities. It is imperative that we differentiate classroom instruction and learning activities that address the student's individual needs. Small group AIS program will provide the support necessary in addition to the whole class instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of the at-risk students will be engaged in AIS (Academic Intervention Service) Program and show progress. Block scheduling will be provided with differentiated small group instruction to support all students at various proficiency levels in cores subjects, such as ELA, Math, Social Studies, and Science. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Provide time and funding for early morning or after school tutoring. Teachers Sep 2018 – June 2019 Before or After School tutoring sessions After School program that provide homework assistance and academic support Teachers and Students Sep 2018 – June 2019 After School Programs Provide non-academic focused After School Programs in line with Youth Development, Art and Culture (Chess, Dance Studio, Art, Crafts, & Drawing, Kung Fu/Martial Arts, Lion Dance, Computer Technology, and Public Speaking programs), Academic English and Chinese Language Learning support. Provide more Youth Development related After School Program to enhance students' social emotional Learning Students Sep 2018 - June 2019 After School CBO and Program Managers Middle School Students Sep 2018 - June 2019 After School CBO and Program managers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Provide frequent parent meetings to keep parents informed of students' progress.  Provide report cards at least 3 times a year as well as online grading report system (middle school) to keep parents informed of student's performances. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Title III  Academic Intervention Services ● Contract with Community Based Organizations (CBO) to provide the cultural/enrichment program for Youth Development 6  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1, 2019 · 50% of teachers will have implemented small group tutoring before or after school Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 1, 2019  50% of students showed progress with at least two literacy levels in F&P Running Record Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the most recent school survey, 45% of teachers felt there was not enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas which they learned from various professional development activities. In response to the survey result, we have designated common planning time during the day, and specific topics and working groups during the Monday afternoon PD time for teachers to work collaboratively, focusing on the supports for ENLs and SWD. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, more than 95% of teachers will be engaged in professional learning activities that have been formed based on collaboration between teachers and administrators, through learning, studying, and practicing scientific research-based instructional knowledge, skills, tools, or strategies in their classrooms, which can be measure by the meeting notes and weekly PLC learning logs. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sep 2018 – June 2019 Professional Learning Committee  Create a Professional Learning Committee to design and implement on-going faculty development programming  Committee meets regularly to reflect and monitor the progress of PD in various focus groups.  Modules include inter-classroom observations that focus on: Differentiation and purposeful grouping, and Oral language development Include Paraprofessionals in Professional Learning Community and design PD for Paraprofessionals  (5 teachers from various grades and subjects, with principal and two assistant principals • To build the trust amongst teachers and administrators, we will provide opportunities for inter-visitations based on professional learning modules for learning walks Teachers Sep 2018 – June 2019 Professional Learning Committee • Weekly discussion, sharing and studying of professional learning topics during the Monday afternoon professional learning time Teachers Sep 2018 – June 2019 Professional Learning Committee • Activities include but are not limited to: o Studying and discussing best practices in instructional theory/ knowledge o Demonstration of learning in classrooms o Providing feedback and sharing of inter-visitation/ learning walks o Additional coaching and suggestions from the contracted consultants, the Teacher Development Coach, and Teacher Team Leaders ● Increase parents’ involvement by providing monthly parent meetings/workshops. Parents, Guardians Sep 2018 – June 2019 Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 9  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parent Workshops coordinated by Parent Coordinator.  Parent meetings arranged by the teachers, SBST, Deans or Guidance Counselors.  Telephone or email communication with parents with teachers, SBST, Deans, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator and school administrators.  Parent Teacher Conferences.  Monthly Parent Newsletters published by parent coordinator and teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. • Contracted Consultants and Coaches • Professional Study/Research • Schedule adjustment/programming support • Title I Parent Involvement Fund for parent meetings with teachers and teacher collaboration. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded X X Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 1, 2019, at least 50% of the teachers have engaged in classroom intervisitation/learning walks at least once.  By February 1, 2019, at least 90% of the teachers have engaged in collaboration activities and provide meaningful evidence of collaborative professional learning activities to Assistant Principals on weekly basis. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Teacher's Study Group Logs  Teacher's Intervisitation Feedback Forms  Observation reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to Eleanor Drago-Severson, Jessica Blum-DeStefano, and Anila Asghar, in Learning for Leadership (2013), four pillars for leadership growth in a K-12 school setting are: teaming, providing leadership roles, collegial inquiry, and mentoring. We are moving towards building a strong school leadership team around this framework. Based on school survey, the school provided structure and time for teachers to work in teams (63% agreed), and 60% of the teachers felt their professional development experiences were sustained and coherently focused. Therefore: · School leaders (administrators) need to provide structured time to support teachers’ team planning and collaboration activities. · School leaders need to increase or at least maintain the number of formal and informal classroom observations / visits to provide more meaningful and actionable feedback for professional growth and support. · In order to build the trust and support healthy relationships with staff, the Professional Learning classroom observations / Intervisitations should provide constructive feedback for conversation and reflection, as well as resources for professional development, collegial inquiry and peer mentoring. The observations will not be used for purely evaluation purposes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 70% of teachers will take on leadership roles to facilitate at least one cycle of PD, curriculum development, or school event that drive student achievement across the school, grades and departments, measured by PLC logs. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? • All teachers are part of a Grade Team with a self-selected Grade Team Leader to be actively involved in curriculum/instructional alignment and implementation. Teachers Sep 2018 – June 2019 Grade Team Leaders, School Administrators, Professional Learning Committee members • School administrators participate in teachers’ grade team meetings on regular basis. • All teachers are observed by administrators and peers who provide timely feedback afterwards, and participate in intervisitation observations at least twice in the school year. • All teachers share their findings/takeaways from their learning walks during the Monday Afternoon Professional Learning Time at least once a month. • The Professional Learning Committee will meet with Grade Team Leaders to discuss and share their Professional Learning experience once a month, and assure vertical alignment across grades. Teachers are involved in decision-making and leadership roles, such as the Professional Learning Committee which designs and implements the school wide Professional Learning activities Teachers Sep 2018 – June 2019 Professional Learning Committee School Administrators, Principals and Assistant Principals, will participate in grade team meetings on regular basis. School Administrators Sep 2018 – June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent English class for immigrant parents and Parent Chinese class for non-Chinese speaking parents to learn the basic language skills in order to support students' dual language learning at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling adjustments   Per Sessions and per diem to support teacher's planning in ATLAS curriculum maps  Common Planning Time  Title I Parent Engagement Activity Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1, 2019, at least 50% of teachers will have shared their learning and takeaways from their research group, outside Professional Development, or classroom observations/intervisitations at least once with either the entire pedagogical staff, their grade teams or their departmental teams. Teachers will share their instructional insights with parents. Parents will have their English or Chinese class for at least one cycle of learning to support their children's academic learning, aligning with teacher's instructional goals. Tools for measuring the progress including: PLC meeting agendas and meeting notes, PLC attendance logs, teachers' reflections from PLC, CASL logs and reflections, and mid-year as well as end of year Teacher's surveys. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Teacher's Common Planning Time Meeting minutes Learning Walks/Intervisitation Low Inference Notes   ATLAS Curriculum Maps Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the School Survey, 90% of parents responded “satisfactory” to their assessment of school culture, compared to 86% the year before. Although we have been improving our school culture and climate steadily in the past few years, collaboration and communication among parents, teachers, and school administration are still not at a desirable level. We need to improve collaboration within the school community Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of parents respond as "satisfactory" to school culture in parent survey. We will achieve this goal by Increasing parents' involvement through individualized parent contact/conference, monthly newsletter, parent workshops, and frequent email and phone messages that will keep parents appraised of their student's progress both academically and social-emotionally, measured by the parent survey. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Provide periodical parent workshops to discuss key issues that help parents support of their children’s academic learning Parents Sep 2018 – June 2019 School Administrators, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Teachers Parents Sep 2018 – June 2019 Parents Parents Sep 2018 – June 2019 Parent Coordinator, PTA Executive Board Sep 2018 – June 2019 Parent Coordinator Publish a monthly newsletter in both Chinese and English that showcases and highlights the success of various school programs, provides the most up-to-date information to parents, and celebrates school successes and events on regular basis Promote parent involvement that promote class parent leadership and build the trust and positive climate in school Provide language learning classes for parents who are interested in learning Chinese/English languages and culture in order to better assist their children in the Dual Language Program 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. APEX for Youth, Chinatown Manpower Inc. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Contract various agencies to provide professional development/workshops including but not limited to: o Charles B. Wang Health Clinic o Gouverneur Hospital o APEX for Youth Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 5  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, published at least 5 newsletters in both Chinese and English, and provided at least 5 parent workshops in various parenting topics · A calendar of events will provide an overview of parent workshops, parent classes and school events · Documentation of such events will be included in monthly newsletters as evidence of parent participation Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Monthly Bilingual Newsletter  Bilingual School Calendar  Bilingual School Messenger  Bilingual School website Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Below grade level (level 2 or below) in NYS ELA test; Previous teachers’ recommendations; Ongoing assessments; Classroom observations; Fountas & Pinnell-below recommended baseline Below grade level (level 2 or below) in NYS Math test; Previous teachers’ recommendations; Ongoing assessments; Classroom observations Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Fountas & Pinnell, NYS/Engage NY CC ELA curriculum, Pearson CC Literature Visual aids; Graphic organizers; Technology-reading program-read aloud; Scaffolding lessons; Differentiated materials; Leveled reading; Guided reading; Pre-teach vocabulary; Modified work My Math, Glencoe Math Accelerated, Algebra 1 Break down word problems; Reinforce mental math & number sense; Use of manipulative Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group instruction; One-to-one tutoring; Peer groups; Differentiated grouping When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day; Morning tutoring; Lunch tutoring; APEX Afterschool program; Afterschool Title III ESL program Small group instruction; One-to-one tutoring; Peer groups; Differentiated grouping During the school day; Morning tutoring; Lunch tutoring; APEX Afterschool program; Afterschool ESL program 7 Below grade level (level 2 or below) in NYS Science test (Grades 4 & 8) and teacher created assessments and rubrics aligned to the NYC Science Scope & Sequence and ELA CCLS (K-8); Previous teachers’ recommendations; Ongoing assessments; Classroom observations Below grade level (65% or below) based on school grading criteria and teacher created assessments and rubrics aligned to the NYC Social Studies Scope & Sequence and ELA CCLS; Previous teachers’ recommendations; Ongoing assessments; Classroom observations Teachers’ Referrals; Evaluations; Lack of motivation; Significant grade fluctuation Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Glencoe Science Review vocabulary; Visual aids; Hands-on experiments; Graphic organizers Small group instruction; One-to-one tutoring; During the school day; Morning tutoring; Peer groups; Differentiated grouping APEX Afterschool program Discovering Our Past History of Us Short videos; Highlight the main ideas; Chunk the reading for meaning; Small group instruction; One-to-one tutoring; Peer groups; Differentiated grouping During the school day; Morning tutoring; Lunch tutoring; APEX Afterschool program Review vocabulary; Graphic organizers During the school day; After School Mentoring Program (Counseling) provided by APEX for Youth Counseling (group or individual); Class presentations (time management, peer pressure etc); Classroom observations; Self-awareness program; Self-esteem coping skills Small group; One-to-one mentoring; Group counseling; mandated one-on-one counseling; Speech/ Literacy Service; After school tutoring; After School Mentoring program 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 70 students Small group instruction  Provide additional School Supplies   Before or after school tutoring  Complementary School Uniforms Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We work with the Office of Teachers’ Recruitment and Quality to recruit and implement retention strategies, and provide continuous support and professional development to ensure the success of our staff. We have also received a grant from the NYC Office of Teachers’ Recruitment and Quality to provide additional stipends for new staff towards their college courses to achieve highly qualified teaching credentials. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). • Provide one-to-one mentoring • Provide grade team support • Provide individualized Professional Development opportunities and Coaching Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 1  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). • Implemented CCLS-aligned Pre-K curriculum that focuses on early childhood development • Parent Workshops for parents of Pre-K and K about early childhood development and early intervention • Early childhood teachers and paraprofessionals work as a team for curriculum planning and assessments • Early childhood teachers and Paraprofessionals attended professional development (Early Childhood Summer Institute) as a team during the summer and during the Per-K non-attendance days 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Assistant Principal Chin and Pre-K teachers attended professional development/training in multiple assessments for Pre-K children, such as the Strategies Gold assessment system and ESI-R. Teachers made their own selection of assessments based on their understanding of the various assessment options. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x x Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal 277,790.00 72,467.00 2  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local 13,172.00 0 3,926,815 x x 5B, 5C, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 3  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 184, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Parental Involvement and School Quality Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: 5   actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA /State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  hosting events to support and asserting leadership in education for their children. parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand; School-Parent Compact (SPC) 6  PS 184, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 7  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 8  ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 9 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Subgroups and Grade Levels of students to be served:&nbsp;&nbsp;Students to be schedule and duration: &nbsp;Thursday or Fridays, one hour a week before and after Cost: &nbsp;Total: &nbsp;$13,51860% Per Sessions: &nbsp;$8,10920% language of instruction: English&nbsp; # and types of certified teachers:&nbsp; Certified ESL/Bilingual Teachers/ Childhood 1-6 Types of materials:&nbsp; &nbsp;ESL&nbsp;from Learning A-Z; 60% Per Sessions: &nbsp;$8,109 20% Material/Supplies: &nbsp;$2,704 10% Parent Involvement: $1,352 10% Professional Development: $1,353 60% Per Sessions: &nbsp;$8,109 20% Material/Supplies: &nbsp;$2,704 10% Parent Involvement: $1,352 10% Professional Development: $1,353 Begin description here: · Rationale:&nbsp; To support students as the New Language Learners to become proficient in English and Content Subject Areas per Common Core Learning Standards. · served:&nbsp; K-8, &nbsp;current ENL&nbsp; · school, bridged classes, for 28 weeks. &nbsp;Total of 6 classes. · · · Compass&nbsp;PathBlazer&nbsp;ELA&nbsp;online learning tool, Getting Ready for&nbsp;NYSESLAT, Leveled Reading books; Listenwise&nbsp;Online ESL&nbsp;Learning Tool; MyOn&nbsp;Literature Library&nbsp;&nbsp; · Material/Supplies: &nbsp;$2,70410% Parent Involvement: $1,35210% Professional Development: $1,353 · · · · · · · · The Title III program will be provided by K-12 licensed ESL/Bilingual teachers. The Title III ENL programs provide extra support to current and former ELL student population. The Title III program will focus on the students who are new comers and the students who are in their first year of Transitional services. All current ENL and transitional ENL students will be offered the opportunity to participate in the after school / before school Title III services. The language of instruction for the Title III program is primarily in English. The programs will include ENL classes for mandated ELLs and new comers, and parent workshops for parents of ENLs. There are two ENL classes taught by two licensed ESL teachers. Each class meet one hour a week, on either Wednesday or Thursday from 2:45 p.m. to 3:45 p.m. for 28 weeks. Materials used includes but not limited to: ESL from Learning A-Z; Compass PathBlazer ELA online learning tool, Leveled Reading books; Listenwise Online ESL Learning Tool; MyOn Literature Library. There are three ELA classes, taught by one ESL certified and two Common branch with Bilingual Extension certified teachers. Each class meet once a week, either on Wednesday or Friday, from 2:45 p.m. to 3:45 p.m. Materials used includes but not limited to: ESL from Learning A-Z; Compass PathBlazer ELA online learning tool, Leveled Reading books; Listenwise Online ESL Learning Tool; MyOn Literature Library. 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information There is one Math class for ENL in Kindergarten level only, taught by the ESL certified teacher. This class meet once a week on Wednesday from 2:45 p.m. to 3:45 p.m. for 28 weeks. Materials used includes but not limited to: ESL from Learning A-Z; Compass PathBlazer ELA online learning tool, Leveled Reading books; Listenwise Online ESL Learning Tool; MyOn Literature Library. Parent workshops meet on Monday and Tuesday mornings from 8:00 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. when parents drop off their children in the morning, from November to May. All Title III programs are dedicated to provide additional content and language support in order to bring students to higher levels of English proficiency in the four modalities: listening, speaking, reading and writing. The language of instruction is primary in English with support in Mandarin Chinese for the new comers. Additionally the ENL students need to be prepared for the language demands of the Common Core Learning Standards which needs to focus on non-fiction content. The Title III program will enhance the language development of students while simultaneously giving students opportunities to engage in practicing English in all four modalities. The students will be periodically assessed during the program with assessments that are aligned with NYS standards and Common Core Learning Standards. Students whose results of assessment show needs for additional assistance will be targeted for individualized or small group instruction that more specifically addresses and tailors to their needs. Since the activities in the Title III programs are intended to provide additional support for ELL, the Title III programs will incorporate large amounts of practice in oral language expression and in performance task activities that are related to content themes. These additional supports will ensure students’ success in their regular classrooms. The fluency and oral language aspect is a big component of the ENL class instruction. The instruction may be implemented in one of the following ways: the ENL students will participate in interactive student activities and use many of ESL resources and material, including on-line Learning Tool "ESL from Learning A-Z" and "Listenwise". They also will use different poetry collections (across the grade levels, sets from K-6), and an online English Literature Library with leveled Reading books "MyOn" on topics related to different themes paralleling the daytime curriculum but also with specific practice in (oral) language structures. Theme based projects and oral presentations of their projects are utilized to motivate and enhance students’ conceptual understanding and language development. The students will apply the English language learning while engaging in fun, motivating, and a creative content based performance tasks and activities. Professional salaries (with fringe benefits) · Supplies and materials · · · · Educational Software · · · · Learning A-Z ESL Compass PathBlazer&nbsp;&nbsp;online&nbsp;learning tool (ELA&nbsp;&amp; Math) Listenwise MyOn 60% Per Sessions: &nbsp;$8,109 ESL&nbsp;from Learning A-Z; Leveled Reading books; Listenwise&nbsp;Online ESL&nbsp;Learning Tool MyOn&nbsp;Literature Library 2  rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: Rationale: All teachers in our school are teachers of ENLs. Our Title III staff participate in the professional development programs provide by 3rd Party Vendor Generation Ready Consultant Company's Instructional Coach once a month; Literacy Coach from MFSC 4 times a year; Monthly District 1 PD, weekly Book Study Groups in Differentiation of Instruction, Curriculum design and mapping, inter-visitations and workshops in CCLS aligned ENL instruction through Content subject areas, strategies and techniques for ENLs and ENLs with disability. The PD are provided through out the school year, September to June, per the offering by the different organizations. Each Professional Development session are for 45 - 80 minutes each session. Part of teachers PD also focuses on oral language development, which include techniques on how to "Make Thinking Visible", Socratic seminar, project based learning and presentation, which will have a positive and lasting impact on teacher's instructional practice. We also provide training to all teachers with ELL regarding the format and preparation of the NYSESLAT, as well as how to read and interpret the NYSESLAT scores of the different modalities in order to better prepare their lessons and unit plans to meet the needs of ENLs. - PD from Generation Ready Consultant/Coach:Coaching Sessions: 4 sessions in Literacy and 4 sessions in Math, total of 8 coaching sessions. Dates will be determined later between the coaches and the teachers. - ELL professional learning opportunities offered by the Manhattan Field Support ENL team - Citywide, Borough wide and D1 Professional Learning Opportunities - Teachers will be sent for PD per the offerings by the District Office or Central. Any additional cost for covering teachers for Professional Learning will be paid for by other school fund. - Schoolwide PLC: Led by teachers of Shuang Wen School who received trainings from either MFSC or District Office. Teachers retrain and turn-key what they learned to the Title III program teachers. Topics include but not limited to Social Emotional Learning, Differentiation of Instruction, Oral Language Development, Learners Agency, and Differentiated Lesson Planning. Teachers meet every Monday afternoon from 2:45 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. to learn collaboratively. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities 3  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Rationale: By providing support to parents will allow parents to support their students' learning more effectively. Topics: The parent engagement activities include two parts: Educational workshops for parents regarding dual language educational model and other education related topics, and Social Emotional Intelligence current and transitional ENLs and their families. Schedule and duration: We offer English classes for ENL parents every Monday morning, 8:00 am to 9:30 a.m. from November to April. The classes are taught by ENL teacher assigned by Literacy Partners, a non-profit organization funded by Mayor's Office. The material they use is We Speak NYC, published by NYC Mayor's Office. We also offer Chinese classes for CNL (Chinese as New Language) parents in DL program every Wednesday morning 8:00 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. from November to April. The class is taught by NYU Bilingual Education student teacher volunteers to assist our non-Chinese heritage speaking parents learn Chinese. The Title III Parent workshops are for families and parents of current and transitional ENLs, as well as non-Chinese heritage speaking parents, so they can support their children’s learning and academic achievement in a more effective and meaningful way in both English and Chinese. The providers of the parent workshops include teachers, parent coordinators, guidance counselors, Student Teachers, and parent volunteers. The schedules of the workshops is usually quarterly. The topics include but not limited to: - How to become a parent volunteers through the training of Learning Leaders? - What are Common Core Learning Standards? - How to prepare my children for the Common Core Standardized Exams? - How does 50-50 two-way total immersion dual language program at Shuang Wen School looks like? What are the related NYS and NYC policies? - How to help my children with their homework? - How to prepare my children for Specialized High School SAT (SHSAT)? - How to apply for the High Schools in New York City? - How to apply for the Middle Schools in New York City? - How to communicate more effectively with my children's teachers? - How to improve college access for my children? All the parent workshops are offered by school teachers, Guidance Counselors, or Assistant Principals. Each workshop last for about one hour. All parents workshops and training information are sent out through one or more of the following methods: Schoolmessenger telephone message services, Announcement posted on school website (e-Chalk), Giant posters outside of school main entrance, flyers/notices backpacked home, and mass emails to all registered parents. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. . N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 4 N/A Per session  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per diem 2. Purchased services 1. High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A __N/a_ N/A N/A 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 01 School Name Shuang Wen School Borough Manhattan School Number 184 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Iris Y. Chiu Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Chipei Chen Teacher/Subject Area Bethany Lo Teacher/Subject Area Mo Wang Related-Service Provider Rose Fechetta Superintendent Daniella Phillips Assistant Principal Yvonne Chin and Mee Kwong Coach type here School Counselor Pao-Lang Wang and Jia Yu Parent Lynn Beret Parent Coordinator Alice Ju McCabe Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 5 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 14 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 650 6 Total number of ELLs 117 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 18.00%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Mandarin Chinese Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Program TBE TBE TBE DL Lang. 3 3 2 3 3 3 3 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 2 3 3 K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 2 2 4 4 3 3 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 23 0 0 23 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use face to face interviews, NYSITELL, and Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Literacy assessment program to assess ELLs' literacy skills. It provides our teachers understanding of student's proficiency levels in English, particularly specific data about their reading and writing ability. In the beginning of the year teachers are notified of their students' English language proficiencies from the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results; through which students are placed in strategic intervention based groups. From that point on teachers consult the test data and use a variety of assessments from Fountas and Pinnell to informal assessments to inform their instruction. For example, teachers gather data from the Fountas & Pinnell on ELLs fluency levels, recognition of sight words and vocabulary levels in their reading and writing skills. Teachers analyze the running records to reveal information about ELLs proficiency levels in reading and writing, which informs the specific intervention plans that will need to take place within the classroom and during differentiated small group instruction. Additionally teachers and school administrators continuously analyze such data to make sure that programs in place are effectively servicing our students. For example, school 7  administrators evaluate student data to decide what areas students can benefit from by providing teachers with more PD opportunities to expand their skills. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers conduct individualized diagnostic and interim assessments using F&P and teacher developed assessments from core curriculum in the core subjects. Teachers meet in grade teams during common planning time weekly and PLC time to evaluate and discuss student's progress and share instructional strategies and intervention plans to further student's progress (Collaborative Analysis of Students Learning, aka CASL) . Teachers adjust and revised their lesson plans and curriculum to address students' needs based on their findings in CASL and strategies learned from their colleagues. Teachers also were sent to various PLC opportunities offered by MFSC or organizations to enhance their instructional skills and knowledge. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our program for ELLs based on student progress and achievement as measured by state standardized tests, including the NYSESLAT, New York State ELA, MATH tests and NYC Chinese Reading Test. We also examine grade level trends and patterns via the framework and determine how ELLs are faring in their progress compared to their EP peers. During grade level meetings, monthly dual language planning meetings, and Chancellor professional development days, where teachers are given designated time and/or release time to plan, teachers are constantly reflecting and evaluating their curriculum, assessment and instruction for all students, especially for our ELLs and SWDs. A specific focus has been spent on aligning our curriculum and assessments to the Common Core State Standards in both Mandarin Chinese and English. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Weekly common planning time with 90 minutes block for teachers to meet and plan together. Monthly 80 minutes PLO time on Monday afternoon to meet and document students' progress via data analysis (CASL). Provide individual online learning accounts in both Compass PathBlazer ELA program and Learning A-Z program. During grade level meetings, monthly dual language planning meetings, and Chancellor professional development days, where teachers are given designated time and/or release time to plan, teachers are constantly reflecting and evaluating their curriculum, assessment and instruction for all students, especially for our ELLs and SWDs. A specific focus has been spent on aligning our curriculum and assessments to the Common Core State Standards in both Mandarin Chinese and English. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses data collected from various assessments, such as F & P Running Records, Compass PathBlazer Reading Online Program, and the ELA and NYSESLAT exams results to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework through ongoing analysis of assessment data by teachers, collection of assessment data through CASL (Collaborative Analysis of Students Learning) binders and through ongoing coaching and PD development opportunities based on the students' needs in the (RtI) framework. Teachers continually analyze data to inform their instruction by careful lesson planning that is Common Core aligned yet differentiated. Furthermore, school administration emphasized the importance of differentiating instruction so that ELLs can achieve those learning targets. Such discussions are held through grade team meetings and analysis of student data that is collected for at-risk students, such as ELLs for RtI intervention. Once intervention plans are written by teachers, ELLs receive such support through differentiated instruction in the classroom and through push-in pull out services that are provided by the ESL Teacher, and individualized online learning tools such as Compass PathBlazer and Learning A-Z. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data shows that a higher percentage of our students are at Transitioning or Expanding Levels according to the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT in the earlier grades from Kindergarten to 5th Grade. Students who have stayed in our programs have shown to gradually test out from the ESL program by testing out of the NYSESLAT; as shown by the fewer number of ESL students in grades 5 and above. We've also experienced an influx of ELLs in the past three years where our ELLs and former ELL 8  populations grew from 13% to over 50%. The performance data also shown that our Dual Language Program is successful because students in our Dual Language Program out performed the non-dual language program students in both ELA and Math in the ELA and Math Common Core Standardized tests, thus allowing students to reach Commencement Level more quickly. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers meet weekly during their 90 minutes block common planning time and monthly PLO time to sharing their findings and make adjustment to their unit curriculum plan and lesson plans, using the methods and strategies learned from CASL practice. Teachers also constantly making adjustment in students' groups (purposeful grouping) during their daily instruction based on their findings in CASL. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Integrated ENL are implemented in our Dual Language program by grades (K-7) with heterogeneous grouping. Integrated ENL and Stand alone ENL are provided in all grade levels as well as through core subject based on students' proficiency levels in NYSESLAT and NYSITEL, provided by TESOL certified teacher (Co-Teaching) with ungraded heterogeneous grouping. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Dual Language program are provided in K-1 following self-contained roller coaster model, and side by side model to students in grades 2-5 in all core content subject areas: Language Arts, Math, Science, Social Studies, and Social Emotional Learning. Dual Language Program in grades 6-7 are content subject based in Math, Chinese Language Arts, Dance, Music and Art classes. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Organizational models used differ across the grades based on the program model, using 50-50 total immersion Dual Language Program. Kindergarten and first grade classes follow a self-contained dual language model; second through fifth grades follow a side-by-side alternating day dual language model; Grades six through eight follows a Free Standing ENL model that is either integrated or stand-alone ENL model. Per student's proficiency levels, students in Entering level receive total of 360 minutes of ENL instruction - 180 minutes of ENL, and 180 of Integrated ENL by certified ESL or Bilingual teachers. Students in Emerging level receive total of 360 minutes of ENL instruction -- which includes 270 minutes of Integrated ENL Instruction and 90 minutes of ENL by ESL or Bilingual certified teachers. Students in Transitioning and Expanding Levels receive 180 minutes in Integrated ENL instruction by ESL or Bilingual certified teachers, and students who reached Commanding level or Proficient level in the past two years receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL in ELA, content areas, such as Math and Humanities periods, by certified ESL or Bilingual teachers. 9  All classes are heterogeneously grouped. The upper grade group (Grades 6-8) mostly convenes as an ungraded group. Additional periods are given to beginner and intermediate ESL students who require additional mandated time 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the Dual Language Program grades K-5, the content subject areas are being delivered in both English and Mandarin Chinese where 50% of instructional time is delivered in English and 50% of instructional time is delivered in Mandarin Chinese. For grades 6-7, Math, Language Arts, Music, Dance and Art are delivered in both English and Chinese based on student's language proficiency level. ENL and Bilingual instructional methodologies with Shelter strategies are implemented in the classrooms across all subject areas. Content areas are delivered in each program model through the instruction of thematic units. All teachers collaboratively plan thematic units around Language Arts, Math, Social Studies and/or Science themes as indicated by the state standards for that grade. Teachers incorporate a range of language acquisition and instructional approaches and methods to make content comprehensible in order to enrich language development. In our dual language program, content areas are delivered through the instruction of thematic units in both languages. Each unit integrates multiple subjects such as Language Arts, Math, Chinese Language Arts, Social Studies and Science. Materials: For 2017-2019, for ELA in Grades K-5, we will use Common Core aligned "Reading Wonders" and supporting material published by McGraw Hill. We will also use Compass PathBlazer and Learning A-Z online learning tools to support and supplement the instruction for lower level English proficient students. For math, we use My Math. For Chinese, teachers develop Chinese thematic units corresponding to "Reading Wonders" units focusing on the alignment of Common Core Learning Standards. We use "Let's Learn Chinese" from Taiwan for Chinese Language development instruction. We also use trade books, translated picture books, workbooks imported from Chinese-speaking countries. Social Studies and Science are integrated with English Language Arts and Chinese Language Arts in thematic units. For Grades 6-8, Integrated and stand-alone ENL programs are provided through integration of content subject areas, using material that is aligned with the specific grade content specialty subject material which is Common Core Learning Standards aligned. . 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language, careful attention is paid during the registration process to the language (dialect) spoken by the family and what was indicated on the Home Language Survey. Many of our school personnel are able to support assessing the level of native language ability in the students’ particular dialect. However, we also do extensive assessment in Mandarin Chinese as well. Over the past six years, teachers have worked collaboratively and have developed leveled Chinese reading material and assessment tools that are aligned with the English curriculum and the New York State Common Core Learning Standards. Diagnostic for DL program: We rely on teachers developed leveled reading assessment tools, teacher observations, diagnostic and interim assessments through out the year, portfolios/work samples/teacher comments from previous years and on-going formative assessments to track and monitor students' progress in their home language. Formative assessment: teacher observations, tests, quizzes, portfolios, performance tasks. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 0  Differentiation of instruction for ELL subgroups is primarily evident in the materials and methods used for instruction. In addition, scheduling is also another way differentiation occurs for ELL subgroups. SIFE students and newcomers (less than three years) are first assessed to determine their level of L1 literacy, English language literacy/ability and general strengths and weaknesses. Their background and educational history will be determined during the family interview and survey and then they are placed in the appropriate Dual Language or ENL class as mandated by the New York State Department of Education. In addition, SIFE and newcomers are screened through the Response to Intervention (RTI) process and usually targeted for additional support during extended day (morning and/or after school tutoring) time. During RTI time, targeted assessment and instruction occurs to fill gaps in the students’ knowledge and understanding. Most of the newcomers enter our school in the primary grades, so they will only take school and class-wide assessments and the NYSESLAT in the spring. However, the newcomers that arrive in the testing grades (3-8) who have only one year to acculturate before having to take the New York State standardized tests are given additional support year round through before and after school small group tutoring and additional preparation sessions dedicated specifically to test preparation. The plan for ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years and long-term ELLs (completed 6 years) is to increase the amount of content area reading and vocabulary in their instruction. Teachers preview vocabulary words and provide differentiated reading comprehension strategies to such ELL students so that they can be successful at the task at hand in the classroom. An emphasis is placed on developing these students’ academic language, as opposed to their social language. Additionally, an increase in collaboration and articulation with the students’ general classroom (content) teachers are important to ensure that the pull out or push-in services are seamless. Additionally, these students are targeted for RTI services and/or Title III funded tutoring services where students will get explicit instruction in targeted areas of literacy where they are in need of additional support. We offer Title III tutoring before and after school during the week days. For former ELLs, they receive additional 90 minutes of ENL through content areas provided by ESL or Billingual teachers, who ensures that students are provided with the ongoing differentiated instructional strategies in the classroom and are monitored through consistent assessments throughout the schooling year. Also on formal tests, former ELLs are provided with extra support if allowed by the assessment. For example on the Fountas and Pinnell task, former ELLs are given more vocabulary preview before reading a book to make sure that they are able to read the book at hand. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers use a wide variety of strategies to meet the needs of ELL and SWD. Teachers use the whole language approach to teach by integrating language arts with other subject areas, such as math, arts, music, dance, etc. Teachers use different kinds of age-appropriate reading activities through balanced literacy approach. In each lesson, there are content goals as well as language goals. Teachers focus on the acquisition of academic vocabulary and academic language proficiency. All of the lessons are content based and are aligned with CCLS. All materials such as teacher-made materials, trade books, translated materials, foreign language teaching materials, and workbooks have been CCLS aligned with the implementation of the new Common Core aligned curriculum. Furthermore, teachers of ELL-SWDs also take into account grade appropriate texts that are made more engaging through the use of technology such online learning tools, such as Compass PathBlazer or Learning A-Z to provide background knowledge and vocabulary support that students may need. Students were also provided laptops or tablets to allow them to do research and Google Translate to further understand the key topics in the content areas. For example, 5th Grade students explored a CCLS aligned informational texts on rain forests by reading a colorful and age appropriate text on rain forests. Students then also used computers to research about rain forests to create their own informational texts on rain forests. Students then present their research and project during their publishing party in both English and Mandarin Chinese. 1  The school administration all ensures that ELL-SWDs receive appropriate instruction by ensuring that their needs are met through IEP recommended staffing. Students who are ELL-SWDs are assigned to a staff member who provides SETSS or Self-Contained small group instruction, as well as ICT Co-Teaching , Speech Improvement Instruction, and related services such as Physical Therapy and/or Occupational Therapy. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Special Ed teachers, ESL and Dual Language Bilingual teachers work together to delivered/implemented IEP goals through content subject areas instruction in the ICT classroom environment or SETSS services. Teachers address students' academic and language development through academic language and content knowledge instruction and learning activities. Specific strategies include: a) Teachers meet regularly during their common planning time and analyze and do item analysis of students' work or assessments, the result of NYS standardized exams (including NYSESLAT) to identify the areas of challenges for ELL-SWDs to implement specific instructional strategies in their curriculum, lessons and learning activities during their common planning time with grade teams and Assistant Principals. b) Students are guided to complete performance tasks that are aligned with Common Core Learning Standards in both ELA and Math which will require students to present their work through oral presentation and essay writing. c) Staff implement curriculum incorporating ESL methodology using ATLAS online planning software to plan their unit plans, assessments and curriculum which is aligned with Common Core Learning Standards. d) Teachers analyze and understand the strength and weakness of individual student’s learning via strategies and plans in Response to Intervention Program (RTI). Weekly grade team meetings to set learning goals for students as well as implementing differentiated strategies to address different student’s learning needs. e) Teachers implemented purposeful grouping and parallel teaching, station teaching to differentiate their instruction and meet student's needs. Teachers designed their lesson by providing different entry points in Universal Design for Learning (UDL) for ELL-SWDs to help them achieve their IEP goals and attend English proficiency in the ICT classrooms, which is least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Both ESL and Dual Language Bilingual education are delivered/implemented through content subject areas instruction. ESL or Bilingual certified Teachers address students' academic and language development through academic language and content knowledge instruction and learning activities. Specific strategies include: 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In 2017-2018, our Dual Language program will expand to 7th grade, and in 2018-2019, the DL program will grow to include 8th grade. We will also continue to provide ICT classes in our Dual Language program in all grades, K-8. We have also brought in additional CBO After School Programs for additional academic support and it is expected to continue. The After School Programs will include both academic support, such as English and Chinese language acquisition, sport, art and cultural enrichment programs as well as social emotional and leadership training. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No program or services will be discontinued. In fact, we are expanding our Dual Language program to 7th grade. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Information about Title III supplemental services or after school programs are posted on school website and on the front door entrance. ALL parents, including parents of ELLs, also receive regular emails and newsletter informing them the application window and opportunity to register for the programs. We also offer adult ESL and Chinese Language Arts classes to our parents to help them support their children's education. 2  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We subscribe to the Compass PathBlazer online learning in both ELA and Math through iLearn and Learning A-Z online learning tool. Students use tablets or laptops through computer carts or in the computer lab to enhance and improve their literacy skills through these online learning programs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home Language (Mandarin Chinese) is being supported via Dual Language Program daily instruction with regular assessments and interventions. Teachers of Bilingual Education create and design appropriate homework, class work and periodic assessment to monitor student's progress in Mandarin Chinese via content subject learning activities. Teachers evaluate and discuss in grade teams via the practice of CASL (Collaborative Analysis of Students Learning) to adjust and implement appropriate strategies to support students' Home Language learning. We also provide Chinese Language After School Program for students whose home language is not English to enhance their Chinese Language learning in the DL program. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services, support, and resources correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. As our whole school works to align its curriculum and instruction to the Common Core State Standards, a heavier emphasis will be paid to the integration of content and literacy through the use (reading/writing) of informational text. This emphasis makes it easier to find materials at varied reading levels that are appropriate and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Teachers meet in grade teams, attend PD trainings and discuss age specific strategies that provides support for the ELLs appropriate age and level. Additionally, the Dual Language curriculum is utilized to draw upon ELLs' native language comprehension, to transfer to their comprehension in English. This allows teachers to utilize different strategies such as reading a read aloud text in an ELLs native language to support their comprehension in English language. In our dual language program, all students receive instruction in Chinese 50% of the daily instructional time and English 50% of the daily instructional time. In our free-standing ENL program, entering and emerging levels students are given 360 minutes, or 8 forty-five minute periods, of ESL instruction through content. Native language is only used as a minimal support for students in the free-standing ESL program. For Expanding students, 180 minutes, or 4 periods, are delivered by a TESOL certified teacher and 180 minutes are delivered by an ELA teacher. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share our building with another school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We offer New Student Orientation with students and parents of the newly enrolled students with bilingual material to assist them adjust to the school life before the beginning of the school year. However, some of our students arrive at different points throughout the school year. In these instances, these students are enrolled in the Title III after school program where they can get immediate support in a smaller group setting. We also offer parent workshops for ELLs parents and parent orientation to assist the parents and students transition into the new school year. Guidance Counselors, parents coordinator, and Principal are the key school staff involved in these activities. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We only offer language elective in Mandarin Chinese for grades 6-8. All students in K-5 take courses in both English and Mandarin Chinese in the Dual Language Program. Students receive both FENL and Chinese Language Arts in separate and designated periods. All students are required to take Chinese Language Arts for 4 periods (45 minutes per period) a week. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 3  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? In all of our dual language classrooms 50% of the instructional time is taught in each target language respectively. For self-contained classrooms, a half-day roller coaster model is followed. For side-by-side classrooms, an alternating day model is followed. Both models follow a ten day cycle to maintain fidelity to the 50/50 dual language model. EPs and ELLs are integrated in one classroom 100% of the time. However, there are times when the teachers may homogeneously group students within the classroom in order to address specific needs within a lesson. Most of the content areas are integrated into the general classroom instruction. For grades 4, 6, 7, and 8 the content areas may be departmentalized and taught by subject speciality teachers. In dual language program, all content areas are taught in both languages. Subjects are taught through integrated thematic units in both languages. For example, students learn a lesson on day one in L1. On day 2, students review what they have learned on day 1 and learn a new lesson in L2. On day 3, students review what they have learned in day 2 and learn a new lesson in L1. And so on and so force. In addition to learning all core subjects in Chinese and English with their subject teachers, students also receive instruction in Music, Art and Dance in both English and Chinese, which are taught by bilingual cluster teachers. Language is separated primarily by time. In some cases it is separated by teacher and subject as well. For example, our kindergarten classrooms may begin one day in Chinese and end the day in English. The following day they will begin the day in English and end the day in Chinese. The instructional schedule for subjects remain the same however and the language switches on the day it corresponds to. For example if math is taught in a morning block, students will learn math in English one day and in Mandarin on the other day. However, for the side-by–side classrooms, one class of both EPs and ELLs will start off one day in Chinese and the next day will switch to an English classroom. They will have two teachers, one for English (ESL certified) and one for Chinese (Chinese Bilingual CB certified) depending on the day. Teachers in the side-by-side model plan closely to ensure that their curriculum and instruction are built upon the previous day's work. Within each thematic unit, teachers will plan carefully which tasks, lessons, or activities will be delivered in which language. As described above, kindergarten and first grade classrooms follow a self-contained roller coaster alternating day model. Starting from second grade, classrooms grade classrooms follow a side-by-side alternating day model; except for the ICT classrooms which follow the self-contained roller coaster alternating day model. A simultaneous bi-literacy approach is used in our dual language classrooms, which means that children 4  learn to read in both languages at the same time. Because Chinese and English are so different when it comes to reading and writing, we feel this model is best. Teachers use well-defined times (of the day or days) to assist students in making the differentiation between languages, and the instructional materials and charts are shown in different areas between English and Chinese as well as Zhuyin (Chinese phonics). Language proficiency of L2 for Eps: Students will develop communicative and academic second language proficiency using ESL methodology. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development (PD) plan for ELL personnel includes but not limited to the following: Mentors for new teachers; Literacy coaching offered by MFSC; Contracted Consultant for curriculum and instruction coaching; Inter-visitations and observations, as well as lesson studies and planning with other D1 and D2 schools ENL and Bilingual classrooms sponsored by special PD grant from Kellogg Foundation. On-site PD trainings, meetings and common planning time for teachers of ELLs held during weekly common planning time, Chancellor PD Days, Monday afternoon teacher PLC time, ESL and Dual Language training provided by District office and MSFC; Off-site PD workshops and conferences NYCDOE (DELLSS) sponsored, LOTE conference, Chinese Bilingual Teacher Learning Institute, and Spring City-wide Bilingual Education Symposium, etc,); and frequent informal observations by administration with feedback from school administrators. Non-Pedagogic staff of ELL also receive professional developments offered by MFSC and in-house PLC. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Because we are a Dual Language School, we focus all our professional development activities in support the learning and teaching in bilingual education and English as a New Language development (ESL/ENL). We tailor our PLC based on the data analyses collected from our CASL (Collaborative Analysis of Students Learning) practice. As the ELLs progress from grade to grade within our school, our PLC meet, discuss and adjust our Professional Learning focus from one PLC cycle to another. This includes book study, inter-visitations within school and outside of schools, lesson study, share-out, coaching, ongoing feedback from administrators, articulation between teachers across grades and content areas as well as with the guidance counselor during grade team meetings, common planning time, and school wide PD time. Teachers select their preferred PLC group to join before each PLC cycle. Each PLC group submits their weekly meeting notes to Assistant Principals with a specific focus of their professional learning targets. Teachers submit their collective curriculum unit plans on ATLAS for administrators to review. Monthly vertical grade team meetings allow the grade team leaders to discuss, adjust, and align their curriculum across the grades. School payroll secretary keeps files of every teacher's professional development activities outside of school building, including agenda and attendance, to track the engagement of all PD received either through DoE, grant, or collaborations with teacher colleges. Assistant Principals and Principals work closely with contracted coaches to schedule and assign personalized Professional support to individual teachers, as well as keep track of 5  their professional growth and development. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We designated every Tuesday afternoon as the time for teachers to meet with parents and discuss their students' goals and progress. Interpretation and translation are also provided by in-house staff or over the phone translation service. During curriculum nights and Parents Teachers Conference, teachers discuss with parents their benchmarks progress in details. Translation and interpretation services are provided through in-house staff or contracted interpretation services. Each grade also host publishing parties on quarterly basis to share students' progress in DL in all core subject areas in both English and Chinese. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We offer parents Adult ESL class on weekly basis, including the parents of ELLs. For ELL who are SWD, student's progress are monitored closely by the Special Ed Teachers and Special Ed Liaison, Ms. Amy Lu, and Assistance Principal Ms. Yvonne Chin. Annual IEP and tri-annual IEP meetings are held according to IEP recommended schedule with the ELL parents, all subject teachers, Special Education service providers, and school administrators. All ELL students records are kept with BESIS coordinator and Assistant Principal Ms. Chin. Parent involvement occurs in a variety of ways. The primary connection is with their child's main home/class room teacher. Since the majority of our ELLs are in our dual language program, these parents are invited frequently for school and class events such as publishing celebrations, field trips, and performances. In addition, the school staff as well as our community partners will provide parent workshops throughout the year covering a range of topics such as: How to communicate with your child; Introduction to the HS application process; How to help your child prepare for the NYS standardized tests; What are Common Core Learning Standards; and How to develop your child's Social Emotional Intelligence, etc. Finally, parents are also welcome to volunteer in our school. We train and vest our parents to become active members of our school community, not only in classroom instructional support but also in providing library access to our students, assistance in cafeteria, as well as organizing and supporting school wide events such as Book Fairs, Field Day, and Lunar New Year celebration. Our parent coordinator continue to reach out to parents who have time to help out around the school or in the classrooms. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 6  7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Iris Chiu, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Shuang Wen School School DBN: 01M184 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Iris Y. Chiu Title Principal Yvonne Chin Assistant Principal Alice Ju McCabe Parent Coordinator Chipei Chen Lynn Beret Bethany Loo Jia Yu Daniella Phillips ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/15/17 10/15/17 10/15/17 10/15/17 10/15/17 10/15/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/15/17 10/15/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 9  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 01M184 School Name: Shuang Wen School Superintendent: Carry Chan The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Mee Kwong Meisheng Ju Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Gloria Marquez School Aide Yes Yes No Yes Yes No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Based on the Home Language surveys given to each student upon first entering our school and statistical data on our school report card, the parent coordinator, along with our bilingual school aides ensure that all written and oral interpretation needs are met within the calendar of events and documents issued by the DOE in English. All parent meeting, events and workshops are convened by having a Chinese interpreter present. The Blue Emergency Card, HILS and ATS reports indicated that more than 85% of our parents chose Chinese as their primary language of communication. For parents of other languages, such as Spanish and Japanese, over the phone interpretation will be available for parents. 0  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Chinese English Spanish Japanese Chinese English Spanish Japanese Chinese English Spanish Japanese Chinese, Any English Spanish Japanese 51.57 47.28 1.05 0.1 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent handbooks, school calendar, after school program information, all testing information or school wide event announcements. Information on School website is also translated. June 20, 2017 September, 2017 In-house staff will do the translation: Parent Coordinator and School Aides monthly newsletters to parents First week of every month Parent Coordinator and School Aides school and DoE announcements As needed Parent Coordinator and School Aides PTA announcements Monthly and as needed Parent Coordinator and Parent volunteers 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Curriculum Night, PTA meetings, School Informational Tours, and September 2017 provide interpretation service(s)? Interpretation Services will be provided by parent coordinator, 1  communications between Guidance Counselors and parents. and Monthly PTA meetings Parent-Teacher Conferences, Per School Calendar Parent Workshops As needed Parent Trainings (English or Chinese Class for parents Weekly bilingual school aides, and bilingual teachers on staff, DoE Translation and Interpretation Units, and contracted professionals / DoE vendors. Interpretation Services will be provided by parent coordinator, bilingual school aides, and bilingual teachers on staff Interpretation Services will be provided by parent coordinator, bilingual school aides, and bilingual teachers on staff Interpretation Services will be provided by parent coordinator, bilingual school aides, and bilingual teachers on staff 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 80% of staff are bilingual in both Chinese and English. Several school staff (about 10%) are bilingual in both Spanish and English. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Chancellor's Regulation will be shared during the Faculty Conference on September 5, 2017 regarding access requirements and resources. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The information is on school website as well as at the Safety Agent's desk/bulletin board at the front entrance. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 2  Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We use parent survey, in English, Chinese and Spanish, to gather information and feedback from parents. Our parent coordinator also are in constant communication with parents to receive feedback from parents formally and informally. 3 
