2018-19 RENEWAL SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (RSCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 05M194 School Name: P.S. 194 COUNTEE CULLEN Principal: KERIANNE HARRISON 2018-19 RSCEP-R 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 194 Countee Cullen Academy 310500010194 School Number (DBN): 05M194 Pre- K through 5 th 244 West 144 th Street, New York, NY 10030 (212) 690-5954 (212) 862-5743 Phone Number: KerianneHarrison Fax: Email Address: kharrison4@schools.nyc.gov PartnershipWith Children KerianneHarrison Derek Anello Neal Levine Michael Green Ruben Brosbe Michael Green N/A N/A School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Geographical District: 05 Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 222-1395 Phone Number: District Information Danika Rux Superintendent: 123 MorningsideDrive, New York, NY 10027 drux@schools.nyc.gov (212) 316-0451 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 337 7 th Ave New York, NY 1001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (646) 470-0721 Phone Number: (917) 339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with 2018-19 RSCEP-R 5  the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development 2018-19 RSCEP-R 6  The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 2018-19 RSCEP-R 7  how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 8   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group KerianneHarrison Neal Levine Michael Green Michael Green Derek Anello n/a n/a Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 10  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) X X X X X X X X X X TanishiaAnderson LeemikaWilson Tracie Bell OshanderHartwell ShalibraFrazier Denise Rodriguez Keith Gebbia Jewel Mendoza Ruben Brosbe CamilleGill Parent Parent Parent Parent Staff Staff Staff Staff Member/ Staff Staff CBO/ Harlem ChildrensZone 2018-19 RSCEP-R 11  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. What Makes Us Special? Our scholars, staff, families, and community members are what make us special. They decided to join our community and we are grateful. We know that we are only as good as the sum of our parts. Our parts are comprised of our scholars, staff members, parents and all community members who we embrace as active partners. We are all dedicated to the highest levels of scholar achievement. Our scholars will perform with distinction because of our innovative approach to teaching and learning. Our balanced literacy program includes a comprehensive phonemic awareness and comprehension component. We expect our scholars to compete at an international level; therefore, we use the TERC Investigations, Teachers College Reading and Writing, Passport Series for Global Connections (social studies), and have adopted Amplify Science for the 2018-19 school year which is aligned to the Next Generation Standards. At P.S. 194M, we also emphasize the link between the classroom and the international culture around us. We are a college readiness school; as a result, our Science & Visual Arts courses provide scholars with a liberal arts college education approach, where they create, discover, explore, and express their thoughts and ideas, preparing them for elementary school and beyond. In addition to our rigorous academic programs, P.S. 194M distinguishes itself by its commitment to developing the character of each scholar. Starting at the pre-kindergarten level, scholars meet in small groups that offer a personalized focus on social-emotional development and civic service using the Yale University R.U.L.E.R. Approach. By living our core values of Accountability, Courage, and Excellence, P.S. 194M exemplifies a harmonious community that strives for excellence academically and socially. P.S. 194M nurtures and develops each scholars' achievement through a collaborative approach. Our teachers meet regularly during grade and vertical team planning preparation periods, using classroom data and an inquiry-based approach to drive personalized instruction. Our partners support our work, making generous donations of time and treasure. Finally, our parent involvement is of paramount importance and helps to support our scholars’ success. The school has a new leadership structure with Mrs. Kerianne Harrison as the Principal and Mrs. Colleen Cornwall-Lewis as the Assistant Principal. Mrs. Harrison is not new to the community, as she served as the Assistant Principal from 2016-2018, and seeks to continue the seeds planted and foundation laid. Several new teachers were hired to support the Renewal efforts of the school resulting in approximately 70% new staff in 2016-17 and 2017-18, three of whom served as teacher leaders. Two of the teacher leaders have taken on coaching positions where they are working to provide teachers in the moment feedback to more rapidly secure teacher pedagogical skills . Together the staff is journeying to insure that all scholars are placed, and remain, on the path to excellence. Vision: P.S. 194 scholars will graduate with increased readiness for college. Our curriculum, character development, and civil service programs provide scholars with the tools and courage to significantly impact and positively transform their world. Mission: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 12  We nurture multiple intelligences and meet the needs of every child through data-driven, small group instruction. We collaborate to cultivate divergent thinking through effective planning, questioning, discourse, and scholar self-assessment. At P.S. 194 Manhattan we are all accountable and responsible for every child’s academic, social and emotional development, and all scholars develop the courage to achieve academic excellence. Theory of Action: If we, administrators, coaches and teacher leaders provide professional learning, ongoing support and coaching around lesson design that is rooted in our instructional anchors of: School Culture, Instruction, and Observation and Feedback, then teachers will be able to implement lessons with a clear through line (CCLS alignment, mastery-based content objective, and the use of the workshop model to deliver a clear model with unpacked thinking, guided practice for scholars to try on the learning, and the opportunity for scholars to engage in differentiated learning activities and discourse) between the stated lesson objective and scholar activities, then scholars will be able to connect their learning activities with a protocol to evaluate and discuss the quality of their work against the stated objective and assessment criteria. Instructional Focus Statement: We believe scholars learn best when they have culturally relevant texts and contexts, and high academic expectations and tasks with scaffolds to meet scholars at their current levels of performance. In an effort to create a learner-centered environment where all scholars are set up for success, we will use the workshop model across content areas to provide scholars with explicit instruction, we will model expectations and skills, and co-construct clear assessment criteria for tasks. We will support all scholars, including SWD (Scholars With Disabilities) and ENL (English as a New Language) scholars with predictable structures, quality scaffolds and supports, and opportunities to work in differentiated flexible groups. In an effort to support our teachers we will prioritize coaching over evaluation and use Whetstone to provide bite-sized feedback to teachers so that they can improve their facilitation skills and empower scholars to exercise their voice and choice. Creed: "We believe we can do all things and become anything we dream. We are responsible for ourselves and our actions. We have compassion for others and we will create a better world. If we believe and work hard, we will achieve. II. Beliefs about scholar learning: (i) Instructional Philosophy: Our instructional philosophy is that through personalization, accountability, courage and excellence all scholars will believe and achieve. Our scholars will excel in all subjects: reading, writing, mathematics, sciences, performing arts, and global connections. Our scholars will develop the critical thinking, problem-solving, and 21st century skills needed to compete in an increasingly global economy. In addition, information, media and technology skills are life and career skills that our scholars will acquire at our school to increase their academic readiness for middle, high school and college. These critical-thinking and technology skills are embedded into our core subjects and are important tenants 2018-19 RSCEP-R 13  to success on interdisciplinary projects. We will graduate scholars who are engaged in their community with global awareness and a strong sense of social responsibility. (ii) Core Values: Accountability: Be Accountable Courage: Be A Courageous Learner Excellence: Always Do Your Best III. Special scholar populations and needs: P.S. 194 is an elementary school, located in Harlem, New York with a population of approximately two hundred and thirty scholars from grades pre-kindergarten through five. The school population is comprised of 50.65 percent African-American scholars, 40.26 percent Hispanic scholar, 2.16 percent White scholars, 3.03 percent Native American/ Alaskan native, 1.3 percent Asian, and 2.6 percent multiracial. The scholar body consists of 18.61 percent English Language Learners and 27.27 percent scholars with disabilities. Boys account for 55.84 percent of scholars and girls account for 44.16 percent. 95.5 percent of our scholars are eligible for free lunch, and approximately 25.4 percent of our scholars live in temporary housing. We are a unique community that thrives on collaboration and striving to be successful. Our scholar needs range from academic to socio-emotional, and we are charged to ensure that they are met holistically. We are fortunate to be a NYC Community School and have mental and physical health services for scholars and families on site. IV. Framework for Great Schools: We are committed to ensuring that our vision is aligned with all of the components of the Framework for Great Schools. In order to develop Strong Family-Community Ties, families are invited to monthly assembly programs where classes hold performances and awards are given to scholars with perfect attendance. We also use this as an opportunity to acknowledge our parent and community volunteers. “Scholars of the Month” are honored at the assembly along with other scholars for improved attendance, behavior, academic achievement and citizenship. We also acknowledge our scholars who exhibited our monthly Character Development theme. Other ways that we facilitate family and community engagement are by publishing a monthly school newsletter and hosting a number of parent workshops and events. Some of the workshops we offer are: Diabetes Awareness, Math and Literacy, Adult Continuing Education, and more. Our Parent Coordinator, and the Community School Director from Partnership With Children (PWC) work collaboratively to organize many of our events. We have also improved our scholar attendance, recruitment of new families, and retention efforts for existing families. Monthly, grade level curricula newsletters, the school’s monthly calendar of events, weekly homework sheets, phone calls and face-to-face meetings, primarily during Family Engagement time each Tuesday, keep families informed and create opportunities for families to engage with the school community. In addition, on a daily basis, community members, and administration greet parents and at arrival and dismissal, thus presenting a welcoming environment for families and visitors when they arrive at the school. Our principal holds informational parent meetings monthly. In addition, administration has an open door policy to all constituents of the community where they give voice to their ideas and scholars’ needs. We have made positive strides in the area of family engagement, and we are working equally as hard to continue developing our instructional practices with all community stakeholders. Our school community as a whole is working together to develop Rigorous Instruction. Given the diverse needs of our scholars, we work diligently to ensure that all of their needs are met and that they are afforded the opportunity to engage in rigorous, grade-level instruction 2018-19 RSCEP-R 14  daily. Systems and structures have been put in place for teachers to hone their pedagogical skills and knowledge to provide rigorous and differentiated instruction to scholars. We define rigor as tasks with R.E.A.C.H. (Real-world connections, Engagement, Analysis, Confidence, and Higher-Order Thinking). We have created an academic schedule where grade teams work together for 106 minutes weekly to design coherent instruction by reviewing scholar work and data. On Mondays, teachers meet for Professional Development for eighty minutes. We have a Staff Development Committee who surveys the staff to ascertain their needs and uses data from other sources to plan choice-based differentiated Professional Development for staff members. We also partner with our Math Solutions consultant to deliver mathematics professional development as well as experts in Teachers College (TC) Writing and Reading to ensure the program is followed with fidelity while simultaneously meeting the needs of all scholars. Our Universal Literacy Coach also supports our ELA efforts in the early grades. V. Partnerships P.S. 194 has a variety of programs that develop and foster our scholars’ academic, social, and emotional well-being. We have partnerships to support the school community such as Harlem Hospital, Harlem Children’s Zone, Partnership with Children, Inc., NY Foundling, Asphalt Green’s Recess Enhancement Program and Waterproofing Program, Ramapo, YANY, LEAP, Bent on Learning (yoga program), and NY Chapter Continental Societies. P.S. 194 has also partnered with New York Cares, an organization that facilitates opportunities for New York City residents and corporate employees to volunteer at schools. All of our partnerships support every aspect of our community. In addition, we have a Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) comprised of our Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, partnership staff, School Psychologist, Data Specialist, Teachers and Administration, who collaborate to determine how to support all scholars with appropriate academic behaviors. During the PPT Team meetings, recommendations and strategies are shared with teachers to support them with implementing interventions for scholars. The Social Worker does outreach to families when needed. Programs that support scholars' academic growth include: iReady, an interactive computer program that assesses scholars' and provides personalized, individualized instruction; myON and Teachers College Writing Project, a program that develops Scholars' writing skills and provides professional development to our teachers to implement the program with fidelity and in-person support. VI. Expanded Learning Time We are fortunate enough to have additional time during the school day to support scholars with their academic and socio-emotional needs through Expanded Learning Time (ELT), where 100% or our teachers and 100% of our educational assistants remain for extended time each day to extend and/or enrich the experiences that take place during the academic day via small group instruction and centers activities. We are leveraging this time, in partnership with our CBO staff and outside organizations, to incorporate additional enrichment offerings such as robotics, arts and crafts, dance, music, arts literacy, yoga, and other choice-based scholar-selected activities. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 15  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 05M194 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 238 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 28 28 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 8 8 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 95.0% % Reduced Lunch 17.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 3.4% 40.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.11 0% 19% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 21.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 67% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 25 23 8 90.0% 1.3% 25.2% 48.7% 1.3% 6.3% 0 0% 7.6 18.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 16  2018-19 RSCEP-R 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Our community has noted progress in the area of curriculum and instruction. School based instructional walk through observations, formal and informal administrative observations, the 2017-18 preliminary results of the May 2018 Quality Review noted teachers use data to plan instruction and scaffold tasks to meet scholar needs. As such, our strengths in the area of rigorous instruction and coherent curricula are that we continue to refine and create curricular documents directly aligned to the Next Generation Standards, complete with the skills and strategies that need to be taught into to make overall school improvement. Our kindergarten teachers have also begun the alignment with the Next Generation Standards to properly prepare their incoming scholars for the expectations their scholars will need to meet in 2020-21. In order to continue to design coherent instruction across all grades and classes, we have made several shifts to the academic day to support our teachers; one such shift is that teachers have two blocks of common planning to meet to discuss the implementation of the overarching curriculum goals. Additionally, teacher teams are actively using scholar work products and other data sources to adapt and adjust curricular documents. Teacher teams also look specifically at the work of ENL scholars, as well as scholars with disabilities to determine how they are performing against their peers. Curricular and instructional adjustments are then made based on the findings. As a school community, we also take, “Data Walks,” 3 times per year. We look closely at our initial, interim and final assessment data in the areas of Fountas and Pinnell Running Records, i-Ready and Ready ELA and mathematics assessments, Teacher's College writing data, and our NEXT GENERATION STANDARDS aligned mathematics TECR assessments. We then look at subgroups of scholars (ENL, SWD, Hispanic and African-American Males, as well as ho`w female scholars and male scholars are performing respectively). We use the aforementioned data to determine trends 2018-19 RSCEP-R 18  among subgroups of scholars and then create curricular documents to meet the needs of the whole community as well as the respective subgroups. In November 2017 we had a three day visit by the State Integrated Intervention Team (IIT). The feedback received shaped our plans for the remainder of the school year, and will continue in the 2018-19 school year. The team noted that "teachers’ proficiencies in embedding higher-order questions in lesson plans and during instructional practice vary". In addition, during classroom visits, the IIT observed that "not all lessons prompted students to make real-world connections, stimulated their engagement, or promoted higher-order thinking". Scholar outcomes on formative assessment data in 2017-18 have shown slight increases in addressing constructive response questions proficiently, however the scholar proficiency in this area overall is still less than 40% across Grades 3-5 and is a priority need. In addition, only 35% of scholars achieved proficiency overall on ELA and math formative assessments. Our area of focus in 2018-19 will be aligned to our Instructional Focus Statement: We believe scholars learn best when they have culturally relevant texts and contexts, and high academic expectations and tasks with scaffolds to meet scholars at their current levels of performance. In an effort to create a learner-centered environment where all scholars are set up for success, we will use the workshop model across content areas to provide scholars with explicit instruction, we will model expectations and skills, and co-construct clear assessment criteria for tasks. We will support all scholars, including SWD (Scholars With Disabilities) and ENL (English as a New Language) scholars with predictable structures, quality scaffolds and supports, and opportunities to work in differentiated flexible groups. In an effort to support our teachers we will prioritize coaching over evaluation and use Whetstone to provide bite-sized feedback to teachers so that they can improve their facilitation skills and empower scholars to exercise their voice and choice. In order to concretize the Instructional Focus Statement we will:  Work in grade teams to create tasks and exemplars that are aligned to the CCLS  We will use 53 minutes of our common planning as a Weekly Data Meeting (WDM) where we will unpack standards, create concrete look fors in scholar work products, and analyze scholar work to adjust our teaching accordingly  We will work to develop the content knowledge of teachers and develop questioning and discussion techniques that will require scholars to enhance their critical thinking skills through our PD Cycles of (School Culture, Observation and Feedback, Data-Driven Instruction, Technical Try-On, and Specialized Team Meetings). The results for the Spring 2018 ELA and math assessments reveal that we grew 8% overall in ELA and 8% overall in Math. This brings our overall proficiency in ELA to 21% and Math to 18%. This growth rate represents 100% growth yearly in ELA from the 2015-2016 school year to the 2017-2018 school year. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? P.S. 194’s vision and focus is to provide rigorous instruction to meet the instructional needs of all of our scholars, particularly our scholars with disabilities and our English Language Learners consistently across classrooms. Our focus is both to develop the content knowledge of teachers and develop questioning and discussion techniques that will require scholars to enhance their critical thinking skills. Teachers create curriculum maps that integrate various content areas into cohesive units to immerse scholars in their learning through scaffolding and enrichment opportunities. Teachers will continue their implementation of TERC Investigations, Teachers College Writers and Readers Workshop, the Science and Social Studies Scope and Sequence, and their Character Development thematic program. Teachers will also continue to integrate instructional models learned from our professional development sessions, ULit and Math Solutions coaches. These programs are aligned to the Next Generation Standards and address the instructional shifts. Throughout the upcoming school year, teachers will refine their lessons during common planning meetings by grade 2018-19 RSCEP-R 19  and/or in grade bands (i.e. K-2) to plan coherent lessons. During these meetings, teachers will analyze scholars’ work to inform their practice with the goal of raising scholar achievement. Also, leveraging our 1-1 scholar technology, teachers will embed the use of technology into their units, which will enable scholars to conduct research and publish their writing. Additionally, the newly formed Expanded Learning Team will plan and implement rigorous learning experiences using project based learning that is aligned with the Science and Social Studies Scope and Sequence during ELT for scholars, along with enrichment, choice-based activities for scholars. Every six weeks, teachers will analyze scholars’ work to monitor scholars’ progress and develop instructional next steps for individual scholars, groups of scholars, and/or whole scholar groups. Teachers will also analyze diagnostic and summative assessment data in all content areas (reading, writing, math, writing, science, and social studies). Teachers will discuss the progress of scholars with parents at specific intervals throughout the year so families are aware of what is being taught, curricular expectations and ways in which they can support their scholars at home. Teachers will also invite families into the classroom so they can participate in the same learning activities that their scholars engage in so they can have experiential learning and continue to support their scholars at home. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? Our vision for the implementation of Next Generation Standards-aligned curricula that meets the needs of diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally, is scholars engaging in rigorous instruction with bite-sized lesson objectives that are concretely anchored in the Next Generation Standards with content that enables each student to relate to his or her cultural context. Scholars will then have the opportunity to engage in activities that are also Next Generation Standards-aligned, but that meet their individual needs. During common planning, grade teams engage in the analysis of work from each of the subgroups to determine trends in their work. Additionally, on a daily basis, scholars will have the opportunity to engage in work that is of appropriate grade-level complexity as well as activities that support their individual academic needs. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? Our vision for diverse program offerings to facilitate scholar development of skills, habits and behaviors to prepare them for college and a career, is that scholars engage in academic inquiry where they have the opportunity to experience an inter-disciplinary approach to various disciplines. These instructional shifts are embedded in the vision in the manner in which they receive personalized instruction to scaffold and/or enrich their learning while simultaneously providing access to material and instruction of appropriate grade-level complexity. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? Scholars engage in the exploration of content through open-ended tasks and investigations that expose scholars to grade-level content in a supportive way so that they are simultaneously improving the academic skills associated with the Next Generation Standards. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? In alignment with the Quality Review 1.2b expectation, we envision teachers using multiple entry points by providing scholars with various opportunities to experience and master Next Generation Standards. One such way this looks is with open-ended investigations in mathematics coupled with math games and centers to support scholar’ development of fluent computation necessary to master all components of the Next Generation Standards. Additionally, in ELA, scholars will engage in lessons with opening phonemic awareness and/or comprehension activities with opportunities for analysis and evidence-based responses. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 20  What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Our vision of the use of comprehensive assessment strategies is that all teachers closely examine benchmark, pre and post assessments across content areas to ensure scholars have multiple opportunities to master content within a unit. This will take place during the first 53 minutes of their weekly common planning time. This will drive our curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions to positively impact scholar outcomes as scholars’ progress is closely monitored throughout and across units of study, as well as at specific intervals across the academic year. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) ESI-R Formative Work Sampling Formative Pre-K Pre-K Fundations and Words Their Way Phonemic and Phonological Awareness K-2 Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark, Summative K-5 Published Pieces Summative K-5 iReady and Ready Diagnostic, Summative K-5 TC Writing Pre/ Post On Demands Formative K-5 Part 3 – Annual Goal Monitor Scholar Learning; Inform Instructional Practice; Make Curricular Adjustments Accordingly Monitor Scholar Learning; Inform Instructional Practice; Make Curricular Adjustments Accordingly Monitor Scholar Learning; Inform Instructional Practice; Make Curricular Adjustments Accordingly Monitor Scholar Learning; Inform Instructional Practice; Make Curricular Adjustments Accordingly Monitor Scholar Learning; Inform Instructional Practice; Make Curricular Adjustments Accordingly Monitor Scholar Learning; Inform Instructional Practice; Make Curricular Adjustments Accordingly Monitor Scholar Learning; Inform Instructional Practice; Make Curricular Adjustments Accordingly Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, scholars will demonstrate a 7% increase in the overall performance scores as measured by the NYS English Language Arts assessment. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 21 Student Attendance Average ELA Proficiency rating (NYS ELA Assessment) Performance Index on the NYS ELA Assessment Rigorous Instruction – increased expectation around task quality, completion & assessment Supportive Environment 2018-19 RSCEP-R 22 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Classroom Teachers and Scholars ELA and Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on NYS ELA Assessment, Attendance September 2018 - June 2019 (weekly common planning meetings) Administration, Teachers, Data Specialist, Professional Development (PD) Team, Director of School Renewal, AIS Coach, SETSS Provider, IEP Teahcer Teachers ELA and Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on NYS ELA Assessment June 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Instructional Staff, and Data Specialist (weekly common planning meetings) Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. All teachers participate in at least two periods a week of common planning with their grade band. The first 53 minutes will be dedicated to analyzing data and using exemplars to create rigorous lesson plans and design coherent instruction for all scholars (general ed, English Language Learners (ELLs), and scholars with Disabilities (SwDs). Classroom teachers will deepen their knowledge in creating a coherent Standards aligned curriculum. Teachers will utilize protocols, such as See It Name It Do It and Data Analysis Protocol, to analyze scholar work products in ELA, writing and math for Scholars in all subgroups (ELLs, gen. ed, SwDs, etc.) to identify scholars’ strengths and needs and provide next steps. How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) NYS ELA and Math Assessments, Ready, iReady, Gates MacGinitie, CCLS-aligned mathematics assessments will be used. Staff will analyze scholar data at specific intervals throughout the school year to determine the increase the ratings of 1e and 3c as measured by Danielson Framework in Advance Analyze scholar data at specific intervals (IReady [3 times per year], TC Writing Assessment [6 week intervals],Unit Math assessments [about 6 weeks], Fundations [approx 3-4 weeks] and F&P Reading Assessment[3-4 times per 2018-19 RSCEP-R 23  The ELT (Expanded Learning Time), Saturday Academy and after-school tutoring will provide scholars with the opportunity to engage in small group and differentiated instruction connected to the NYS Social Studies and Science Scope and Sequence, Next Generation ELA and Math. The instruction will be delivered by classroom teachers so that scholars have the opportunity to experience a holistic academic experience. Scholars and teachers will use the Internet and Microsoft tools to research and publish writings in various genres (i.e., informational books, narratives, and opinion) using the Teachers College Writers Workshop curriculum. Teachers and scholars Attendance, ELA and Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on NYS ELA Assessment September 2018 - June 2019 (5 hours per week) Administration, Instructional Staff, Director of School Renewal year])throughout the school year to determine the improvement of scholar achievement on these assessments Social Studies initial, interim and final benchmark assessment; periodic assessment s (I.e. iReady, READY, Gates MacGinitie. Teachers will analyze scholar data at specific intervals throughout the school year to increase scholar knowledge and academic achievement in these core instructional areas. Teachers and scholars Attendance, ELA and Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on NYS ELA Assessment September 2018-June 2019 (Monthly) Administration, Teachers Unit Pre and Post Assessments. Instructional staff will analyze scholar data at specific intervals (IReady [3 times per year], TC Writing Assessment [6 week intervals],Unit Math assessments [about 6 weeks], Fundations [approx 3-4 weeks] and F&P Reading Assessment[3-4 times per year])throughout 2018-19 RSCEP-R 24  Technology will be used to provide targeted instruction to scholars (iReady, myON) and assess their progress on a continual basis in ELA and Math iReady) A Universal Literacy Coach and instructional coaches will be hired to support improved pedagogical practice school-wide Teachers and scholars ELA and Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on NYS ELA Assessment Administration, Teachers, Director of School Renewal, AIS Coach, SETSS Provider, IEP Teacher September 2018-June 2019 (a minimum 45 minutes of use in ELA and Math each week by each student) Teachers ELA and Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on NYS ELA Assessment September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Teacher Leaders, Director of School Renewal Weekly during common planning and weekly in class coaching the school year to determine scholar growth Instructional staff will analyze scholar usage data weekly to ensure proper usage and will analyze achievement data at specific intervals (at the beginning throughout the school year to determine scholar growth Instructional staff will analyze achievement data (IReady [3 times per year], TC Writing Assessment [6 week intervals],Unit Math assessments [about 6 weeks], Fundations [approx 3-4 weeks] and F&P Reading Assessment[3-4 times per year]) at specific intervals (listed above) throughout the school year to determine scholar growth 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will unpack the Next Generation Standards and Curricula in School Leadership Team (SLT) meetings beginning with our October 2018 meeting. We will then leverage parent teams and leaders across grades to share the information during parent workshops and PTA meeting beginning in November 2018. Lastly, teachers will have 2018-19 RSCEP-R 25  activities in their classrooms, for scholars and their families so they can model and unpack rigorous instruction and how it looks together beginning in December 2018, Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. Team meetings, professional development, consultants, per diem, per session, classroom resources, professional resources, curricula materials, staff retreat, ELT per session. Coach, Data Specialist, Teacher Leaders Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, 100% of continuously enrolled scholars will show a 5% increase between the baseline and interim Ready Assessment that is aligned with NYS ELA assessment Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The specific instruments of measure that we will use to measure progress include the Ready ELA baseline and interim assessments, Teacher's College reading assessments and F&P reading assessments. These assessments results will be used to modify teaching and learning activities. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 2017-18 reports are not yet available, but based on our 2016-2017 School Quality Report, only 85% of teachers say that adults at the school teach scholars how to advocate for themselves. As such, we will continue to refine practices to support our scholars with a focus on addressing the social and emotional needs of all of our scholars and families. We will collaborate with our CBO, Partnership with Children, Inc., NY Foundling, and our Social Emotional Learning (SEL) Team to create clear and concise plans along with a ladder of intervention for scholars who may benefit. In addition, we will further enhance our Character Development Program with the Yale University R.U.L.E.R. program, R.U.L.E.R. is an acronym that stands for Recognizing, Understanding, Labeling, Expressing and Regulating emotions, and Ramapo, two additional partners in this work, to assist scholars in becoming even more self-aware of their feelings and providing tools to talk through and deal with those feelings. In 2016-17 80% of teachers stated that scholars say it is important to come to school every day. The 2017-18 attendance data corroborates this assertion. In 2018-19 the school will be relentless in its follow through and support with the families of scholars who do not regularly attend school. With the support of the on-site medical and mental health services, and a staff trained to deal with scholar social-emotional needs, we will increase the attendance rates each month. While preliminary feedback from the May 2018 Quality Review indicated that scholars were able to identify their next steps towards improvement, a third area of focus will be in the area of trust, respect and support based on preliminary feedback of both the IIT and Quality Review. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 27  Finally, targeted scholar intervention services is an area of focus for our school. ELA and Math formative assessment data indicates that only 35% of scholars in Grades 3-5 have achieved proficiency. We intend to create an instructional position focused on the delivery of Academic Intervention Services (AIS) targeted to each scholar’s individual need in addition to the extended school day on Tuesday through Thursday that provides scholars with an additional 5 hours of instruction each week. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? The vision is for P.S. 194 to be a community school that serves the community. The principal is passionate about meeting the needs of all scholars and ensuring that all scholars are provided with quality education in a safe, welcoming environment. Our Social Emotional Learning (SEL) Team continues our work to implement interventions, and track and monitor scholars’ progress. Our social emotional learning initiatives include: an Expanded Learning Time program (ELT), a Character Development curriculum, an Attendance Task Force, and in 2018-19 we will utilize a social emotional program through a collaboration with the Yale University R.U.L.E.R. program. R.U.L.E.R. is an acronym that stands for Recognizing, Understanding, Labeling, Expressing and Regulating emotions. This will complement the Character Development Program the school implements with monthly themes. These initiatives provide intervention, support, and enrichment to promote scholar voice and leadership. We will also offer an array of clinical, mental, dental, and social services on site through our partnerships. We have new and existing partnerships to support the social and emotional needs of the community. They include: Harlem Hospital, Smile New York, New York Foundling, Harlem Children’s Zone, Asphalt Green, and Partnership with Children, Inc. In order to track and monitor attendance and the effectiveness of our services and programs, we will use data from the PPT and Attendance Teams. The Attendance Team will monitor at risk scholars’ weekly attendance, and the PPT Team will monitor the number of referrals provided to families. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner CBO Focus Partnership With Children Parental engagement, attendance, scholar incentives, manage and identify additional partnerships, NY Foundling On site mental Health clinic Hanac Social services for families (housing, adult education, counseling services, senior programs, employment opportunities) Mid Manhattan Adult Learning Center Reading Partners Adult education (English as a Second Language, Medical career and technical education) Reading Partners mobilizes communities to provide scholars with the proven, individualized reading support they need to read at grade level by fourth grade. Bent on Learning Yoga program Young Audiences of New York (YANY) YANY offers music, dance, theater, visual and digital arts programs, taught by their distinguished company of New York City artists. LEAP LEAP provides scholars in the arts the education required to develop the skills, determination, and creativity to reach beyond their potential. How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? Partnership with Children, in collaboration with NY Foundling, teachers, and the administration work together to create a supportive environment for scholars and families by providing individual, group, and family counseling to support 2018-19 RSCEP-R 28  scholars academic and social-emotional needs. We collaborate to work with chronically, and severely chronically absent scholars to counsel them and their families to increase scholar attendance and outlook on school. Additionally, NY Foundling provides emergency family counseling seven days a week. As a Community School, our CBO partners will also go into the community and reach out to families so that some of the greater needs experienced within the community at large are met. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, Scholar attendance will increase to 93% as measured by Automate the School (ATS). Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Student Attendance Framework: Supportive Environment Framework: Rigorous Instruction 2018-19 RSCEP-R 29 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers and scholars Framework: Supportive Environment September 2018 through June 2019 Administrators, SEL Team, school staff and students, Community School Director High needs scholars, parents Framework: Supportive Environment; Rigorous Instruction September 2018 through June 2019 Administrators, Guidance Counselor, Classroom teachers, SEL Team, Community School Director (Monthly Meetings) Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. All scholars (general education, ELLs, and SwDs) will continue to learn how to develop social skills while engaging in structured social and physical activities provided by Asphalt Green’s Recess Enhancement Program (REP), implementation of the RULER approach and Character Development Program. The Social Emotional Learning (SEL) Team will develop, implement and monitor behavioral management protocols for staff to follow. They will: identify scholars with SEL issues, follow-up with teachers to monitor the effectiveness of the written plan, and communicate with families. How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) We will monitor the number of scholar infractions as measured by the Partnership with Children tracker and the number of OORS reports to assess the decrease in major Incidents as compared to longitudinal data from years past. We will monitor and track the number of OORS reports to assess the decrease in major Incidents as compared to longitudinal data from years past. Attendance trends and academic achievement 2018-19 RSCEP-R 30  The Attendance Team, including school aides, will review attendance from the 2017-18 school-year to identify scholars and classes with low attendance and chronic tardiness. Once we identify scholars, the team will meet with parents to identify, implement, and monitor systematic interventions such as, making phone calls, visiting homes, rewarding scholars with perfect attendance and improved attendance on a bulletin board, and providing workshops to families linking attendance and academics. A school-wide incentive program will be in place to encourage positive scholar behavior and attendance patterns, and increased student achievement. Attendance Scholars and parents July 2018 through June 2019 (Weekly Meetings) Administrators, Guidance Counselor, Classroom teachers, Success Mentors, Attendance Teacher, Attendance Team, Community School Director, Director School Renewal, Community Schools Program Manager Students Framework: Supportive Environment; Attendance; Rigorous Instruction August 2018 through June 2019 Administrators, Guidance Counselor, Classroom teachers, Attendance Teacher, Attendance Team, PPT Team, SEL Team, Community School Director will also be monitored. We will monitor the New Visions Attendance Heat Map and Student Sorter on a monthly basis and look for movement either towards our goal, or away from the goal, and make decisions including the assignment of Success Mentors, home visits and phone calls We will monitor the New Visions Attendance Heat Map and Student Sorter on a monthly basis and look for movement either towards our goal, or away from the goal, and make decisions including home visits and phone calls. We will use a school-wide system to track the impact of the incentive program on scholars' positive behavior. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 31 Students in need of AIS Framework: Rigorous Instruction Administrators, AIS Specialist, Teachers September 2018-June 2019 (2-3 times a week in small groups) Targeted academic intervention services (AIS) will be offered to students through the use of on line tools (i.e. IREADY, myON, Achieve 3000, Mathletics, etc) and by an Academic Intervention Support Specialist during the regular school day and ELT hour. We will monitor the most recent data available (i.e iREADY, READY, student work) biweekly and make decisions regarding continued need for AIS or additional supports 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will empower families by sharing information with them regarding our family services, their attendance data, along with how to enhance their scholar’s academic experiences at home leveraging activities we provide, including access to i-Ready. We will communicate information with families through monthly Parent Workshops, as well as through quarterly Principal Newsletters. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Community school partnerships, Success Mentoring, AIS Specialist, IEP Teacher, Instructional Coach, scholar incentives, school trips, recognition ceremonies Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, scholar attendance will increase to 93.5% as measured by ATS. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Automate the Schools (ATS), New Visions Attendance Heat Map and Data Sorter 2018-19 RSCEP-R 32  Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X X X - 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? On the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide teacher stated the following:  82% of teachers say that the principal encourages feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders  82% of teachers say that they have influence over the development of instructional materials.  64% of teachers say that they have influence over the selection of instructional materials used in classrooms. Additionally, feedback from the 2017 School Survey indicated that teachers were very satisfied with the professional development program. 95% of survey responses "agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have been sustained and coherently focused, rather than short-term and unrelated." 100% of survey responses "agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas", and " included opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school." In addition, 100% of respondents "agreed or strongly agreed that at their school the principal/school leader, teachers, and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively." Teachers need to further improve providing coherent instruction, customized to scholar needs based on qualitative and qualitative scholar data that leads to multiple points of access for all scholars and fostering scholar participation in their learning. Additionally, IIT visit feedback noted that the school needed to create "agreed-upon school-wide protocols to be used as checks for understanding". The use of these protocols developed will be enhanced in the 2018-19 school year. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 34  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? P.S. 194 will promote teacher collaboration in a multitude of ways: professional development and common planning meetings, lesson studies, and data review systems. Teachers will participate in school based, districtwide and citywide professional development on an array of topics, using inquiry as an approach. Professional development opportunities will also be planned by our Professional Development Team, which is comprised of P.S. 194 teachers, to develop teachers’ content knowledge and instructional practices to improve the academic achievement for all scholars (general education, ELLs, SwDs). We have scheduled common planning time every week for teachers to plan, prepare, and share best instructional practices, and review qualitative and quantitative data. The teachers will also have opportunities to meet in grade bands to build cohesiveness and align pedagogy horizontally and vertically. In school year 2017-18 instructional staff members created ELA and math units of study and lesson plans that will continue to be refined in 2018-19 as they look at scholars’ work and develop lessons catered to individual scholar needs. In 2018-19 our school will begin using a new instructional resource in science aligned with the Next Generation Standards for Science. Amplify Science will be rolled out during Summer 2018 and used school wide. In addition, an out of classroom specialty will be focused on science instruction. Teachers will also continue to implement the NYC Passport to Social Studies curriculum. Data reviews of scholar work and assessments in all curricular areas will be refined through our development and implementation of a data collection system, and the use of online scanning mediums for various assessments, which expedite the process of accessing and analyzing quantitative scholar data for immediate use. Teachers will also continue to collaborate around the socio-emotional needs of scholars as well as the academic needs of their scholars, to ensure that every child is safe in their classrooms using the school’s cohesive classroom behavior Accountability, Courage, Excellence (A.C.E.) matrix. Our goal and action plan addresses this area, enabling teachers to collaborate around and implement best practices as a part of their learning from professional development. In addition, protocols to ensure that teachers are consistently checking scholar understanding throughout the lesson and academic day will be improved upon. This is a vital component of effective instruction. All of the aforementioned will support teacher practice and increase scholar learning, which is aligned with our vision and mission. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? We meet as a cabinet twice monthly to review scholar data, such as iReady, MOSL, and pre and post assessments as well as scholar work, and curriculum documents. We will also review teacher evaluation ratings via Advance to determine trends among the school. Once we have looked at the aforementioned data, we make collaborative decisions, including which teachers to prioritize for coaching and/or PD. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Collaboration within teacher teams is paramount to our collective success. We envision each team undergoing the, “Forming, Storming, Norming & Performing,” cycle. Through the adoption of the Meeting Wise agenda protocol using a Data Wise model, all participants take an active role within each team meeting and the agenda is built and designed by those involved. Additionally, an administrator and teacher leader collaborates with grade level teams at common planning meetings monthly to ensure that teams are making adequate progress towards creating a highly functioning 2018-19 RSCEP-R 35  team that collaboratively makes curricular decisions for the betterment of the grade team, vertically team, and school community. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? We envision collaboration across teacher teams to occur on a monthly basis where teams have the opportunity to engage in vertical planning with their respective teams. The purpose of this vertical team planning is to look at standards and strands from Pre - K-5th grade so that teams see the connectedness of curricular and instructional decisions. Through this practice, scholars will become the beneficiaries as they will have a holistic and vertical experience. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed iReady assessments Beginning, interim and end of year assessments will be reviewed in order to ensure consistency with the standards aligned assessment across grades. Use of the iReady supports will be used based on data observed to ensure instructional coherence across the school. Intent Words Their Way/FUNdations Review of early literacy skills so that curricular adjustments may be made in a timely manner across the vertical grade bands. CCLS aligned assessments in Math Focus of exams are aligned with the CCLS and June Instructional report data. Exams are administered at the beginning, interim and end of year and there are pre and post unit exams so that curricular adjustments may be made in a timely manner. TC On Demands (writing) IEPs Teachers will review the TC On Demands to assess individual student progress, note trends within subgroups of students and grade level to inform short and long term instructional decisions Teachers will review IEPs to ensure that scholars individual needs are met and lessons are planned using appropriate scaffolds to increase learning outcomes MOSL (F and P Running Records) Teachers will norm their administration of F and P Running Records to ensure that there is coherence in the administration Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, 85% of classes will demonstrate 1 year or more growth between the initial and final iReady assessment as a result of teachers' engaging in differentiated PD around lesson design to target groups and individual scholars. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Average math proficiency rating Average ELA proficiency rating 2018-19 RSCEP-R 36 Performance index on state ELA exam Framework: Rigorous Instruction 2018-19 RSCEP-R 37 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teacher Leaders, Administration, Professional Development Team, Director School Renewal Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. The Professional Development (PD) Team will meet at least once a month to create a professional development plan that enhances and develops teachers’ content knowledge and instructional practices to improve scholar achievement for all scholars (general education, ELLs, SwDs). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Teachers ELA and Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on NYS ELA Assessment August, 2018-June, 2019 Meetings will take place monthly: August, September, October, November, December, January, February, March, April, May and June How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in positive observations data to measure teacher pedagogical progress. We will also review iReady TC Writing, and CCLS-aligned math data to monitor student progress. Teachers feedback data from professional development sessions will also be used to determine the relevancy and proficiency of the PD plan. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 38  Teacher leaders will turnkey professional development workshops to their colleagues. All classroom teachers will participate and collaborate in lesson study cycles during their common planning periods by demonstrating lessons with teachers in their grade and/or grade band; giving and receiving feedback to help develop their practice; and implementing feedback into their instructional practice. Each teacher will rotate in the cycle at least one time. Also, teachers will participate in inter-visitations, labsites and observe videos to improve their practice. All classroom teachers will participate in weekly team meetings where roles are rotated in order to build teacher collaboration and cohesiveness. Teachers ELA and Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on NYS ELA Assessment August, 2018-June, 2019 Teacher Leaders, Universal Literacy Coach, consultants, PD Team, Administration Meetings will take place monthly: August, September, October, November, December, January, February, March, April, May and June August 2018- May 2019 (a minimum of 5 times per year) Administration, Teacher Leaders, Consultants, Universal Literacy Coach, Director School Renewal Teachers ELA and Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on NYS ELA Assessment Classroom Teachers ELA and Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on NYS ELA Assessment September 2018- June 2019 Administration, Universal Literacy Coach, Lead Teachers, Teachers Professional development feedback, classroom observations data, and scholar assessment data will be reviewed Increase in Advance data to measure teacher proficiency; Increase Teacher Survey data, classroom observations, scholar assessment data Increase in Advance data to measure teacher proficiency; Increase of Teacher Survey results, 2018-19 RSCEP-R 39  4b – Parent and Family Engagement classroom observations, scholar assessment data How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will support teachers with leveraging their parent engagement period for weekly communication with families, additionally, we will use daily communication tools such as classroom dojo and messenger to communicate with families across content areas. To date we have had 2 monthly meetings (September and October) where 32 families came to discuss opportunities to support their scholars at home. They were provided resources and 16 families have signed up to be part of the Incredible Years, which is a 16 week parenting workshop. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher team meetings, curricula resources, professional development sessions, consultants, per diem, per session, ELT per session, iReady, myON, Data Specialist, Teacher Leaders Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In February 2019, there will be a 15% increase in the categories pertaining to productive collaboration among teachers and collaborating to design effective instructional programs as measured by an in house survey aligned with the DOE School Survey. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will create survey questions aligned with the school survey that will benchmark teacher collaboration and assess how we are doing across various points throughout the school-year. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 40  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The final report for the 2018 Quality Review stated that "School leaders and peer collaborative teachers promote the development of teachers through strategic cycles of observations and inter-visitations," The school will continue to staff three teacher leaders to work alongside the administration to nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff. Based on the 2017-2018 School Quality Snapshot, 87% of survey participants responded positively to questions about effective school leadership. 86% of school teachers indicated that the principal communicates a clear vision. Additionally, only 68% of teachers indicate that curriculum and instruction are well coordinated across different grade levels. In order to improve in the area of effective school leadership, the principal will work closely with Teacher Leaders, the School Leadership Team, parents, and the entire school community so that everyone is taking part in the School Renewal process by collaboratively giving input into the needs, wants and action plan as we move P.S. 194 forward. The principal and teachers will invest in a clear vision and will align all available resources and planned tasks around the same. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 41  The school leader will articulate a shared vision and mission to the entire school community- staff, teachers, parents, partnering organizations, and the community at large. The school vision will be shared at staff meetings, parent meetings, in the Staff Handbook, Parent Handbook, on bulletin boards and through letters to staff and parents. Staff receives weekly letters from the Principal that highlights instructional best practices and new teacher learning to be implemented. The Principal will ensure that P.S. 194 pedagogues improve their instructional practice by: conducting “snapshot” walkthroughs, formal and informal observations, providing timely, effective feedback, providing professional development in collaboration with the PD Team;. The Principal will be an active participant in lab-sites, inter-visitations and intra-visitations. The Principal and Instructional Team will communicate instructional needs and progress of P.S. 194M, with our community based partner at monthly meetings. The Principal, Instructional Team, and Professional Development Team will track and use scholar data, teacher reflection sheets, and Advance data (Domain 3) to track progress and determine next steps for teacher practice and scholar achievement. School teams include: the Social Emotional Learning Team, the Professional Development Team, and the Attendance Team. Each team will be accountable for fulfilling their role in supporting teacher development and scholar achievement. The SEL Team will identify, implement, and monitor school-wide behavior management systems. The PD Team is responsible for creating professional development that enhances and develops teachers’ content knowledge, instructional practices, and pedagogy to improve scholars learning and achievement. The Attendance Team will improve scholar attendance by expanding and monitoring a preventative tiered system that provides supportive solutions scholars with attendance issues. The Assistant Principal will oversee the Social Emotional Team and the population of scholars with special needs. The Community School Director will meet at least once a week to discuss the school’s progress and next steps for teacher practice and scholar achievement. We will work collaboratively to share and communicate data and refine our practices collectively as a school community to propel P.S. 194 forward. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? School leaders plan to focus on using distributive leadership to create a culture of academic and socio-emotional excellence. One way we plan to do this is by engaging in transparent and open communication with staff, scholars, and parents so that everyone is clear on expectations. Additionally, we plan to use the school based teacher leaders to build capacity from within. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? During our August 2018 retreat as a staff we will revisit our vision, mission and core values to create an action plan for bringing these guiding principles to life with scholars. The aforementioned statements will be reviewed regularly to ensure that our actions are aligned with our data: diagnostic, summative, and formative. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? I will leverage my AP, data specialist, Universal Literacy Coach, Director School Renewal, AIS and IEP teachers, consultants and teacher leaders to build capacity and bring our shared vision to life and to facilitate community initiatives. Lastly, I highlight strong classroom practices to support leadership through inter-visitation and shared practices. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 42  We will leverage the SLT, and PTA to create a shared understanding of the school governance processes, and collaboratively determine ways that we can create a shared vision for school improvement. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy Monthly One Week As an instructional leadership team we will engage in instructional rounds to norm our collection, aggregation and rating of teacher practice. What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Teachers will regularly review iReady, READY, MOSL, Gates McGinitie, unit assessments and TC On Demand assessment data in addition to scholar work to plan purposeful instruction to support all scholar learning needs. Administrators will participate in data walks and use Advance data to determine whole school needs and professional development. Coaching Cycles, data meetings, Professional Development on assessing scholar work Principal, Assistant Principal, Data Specialist, Universal Literacy Coach, consultants, Director School Renewal Classroom inter-visitation, coaching cycles and choice-based professional development. Principal, Assistant Principal, Data Specialist, Universal Literacy Coach, consultants, Director School Renewal How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? We will leverage the Advance observational data and Quality Review rubric to evaluate our curriculum, teacher programs, and organizational resources to help determine and plan for individual and whole school needs. Given the current state of the scholar achievement data, select scholars will be programmed for academic intervention services (AIS), will work with a Success Mentor, and each scholar will use technological tools (I.e. IREADY, myON) as we aim to target their individual instructional needs. We will leverage our budgetary funds to support scholar programming and academics. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in the areas related to Effective School Leadership pertaining to the principal communicating a clear vision as measured by the School Survey. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 43 List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Student Attendance Framework: Rigorous Instruction Average ELA Proficiency Rating Average Math Proficiency Rating Performance Index on ELA exam 2018-19 RSCEP-R 44  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers will engage in Professional Development that follows a predictable rotation: Teachers 5 Week Rotations ELA and Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on NYS ELA Assessment, Framework: Rigorous Instruction Administration, Professional Development Team, consultants, Universal Literacy Coach, Director School Renewal How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in positive outcomes on teacher observations; Increase in scholar achievement as evidenced thorough scholar work and formative assessment data 1. School Culture 2. Observation and Feedback 3. Data-Driven Instruction 4. Technical Try On 5. Specialized Meetings Each rotation will support teachers in developing a deeper understanding of how School Culture, Observation and Feedback and Data-Driven Instruction correlate to scholar achievement. They will use the 4th and 5th weeks of a Technical Try on and Specialized Meetings to concretize learning and scholar impact. Teachers have 106 minutes of Common Planning each week. The first 53 minutes will be spent in what is known as the Weekly Data Meeting. During this meeting we will unpack the CCLS to what scholars need to know and show. Teams will then plan instruction Teachers ELA and Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on NYS ELA Assessment, Framework: Rigorous Instruction, Framework: Supportive Environment October 2018 to June 2019 Administration, PD Team, Teacher Leaders, consultants, Universal Literacy Coach, Director School Renewal Increase in scholar achievement as evidenced thorough scholar work and formative assessment data as evidenced by 2018-19 RSCEP-R 45  and activities aligned to the CCLS and revise curricular documents to support the same. The Professional Development Team and outside consultants will plan and implement differentiated professional development and parent workshops (i.e., RULER, Supporting ELLs in Your Classroom and at Home, Meeting the Needs of SwDs, Using Technology to Engage All Students) based on teacher need and school initiatives. Administrators and coaches will conduct weekly coaching and observation anchored in the Getting Better Faster Guide and Danielson. Teachers who are on Teacher Improvement Plans will receive coaching twice a week and teachers who were overall rated ineffective will receive planning support 4 times per week. We will use the Whetstone Platform to track teacher progress and provide bite-sized feedback. Administration along with the CBO partnership will spearhead a school-wide attendance initiative to promote strong attendance practices among all families pre and post assessments in ELA and math, scholar work exemplars and interim assessments such as iReady, Ready and mini state assesments. Teachers, scholars, and parents ELA and Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on NYS ELA Assessment, Framework: Rigorous Instruction, Framework: Supportive Environment Teachers ELA and Math Proficiency Rating; Performance Index on NYS ELA Assessment, Framework: Rigorous Instruction October 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Professional Development Team, Parent Coordinator, Universal Literacy Coach, Teacher Leaders Increase in scholar achievement; decrease in OORS and SOHO data September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, PD Team, Teacher Leaders, Director School Renewal, Universal Literacy Coach Increase in positive outcomes on teacher observations; Increase in scholar achievement as evidenced thorough scholar work and formative assessment data Teachers, families, scholars Attendance September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Director School Renewal, CBO, Community School Director, Community School Program Manager increased scholar attendance, decrease in absences and latenesses 2018-19 RSCEP-R 46  4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will make sure that the school leaders are accessible to families at various times that are convenient.School leaders and coaches will also offer daily, weekly and monthly times where families can come to share their thoughts, ideas, questions and concerns. Lastly, we will ensure that families receive regular communication regarding their scholar’s academic progress and that we invest them as key leaders in our community through parent leadership groups. During the September PTA elections we elected new Executive Members of the PTA who meet on a weekly basis to plan events and provide support to families who are in need. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Collaborative planning sessions, per session, ELT, per diem, pro-rata, curricula resources, professional development, principal and teacher inter-visitations, parent surveys, family incentives, adult education, consultants, personnel Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, there will be a 6% increase in the areas related to Effective School pertaining to the principal communicating a clear vision as measured by a periodic (6 week intervals) in house survey. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In house survey will afford parents the opportunity to communicate their concerns during various times of the year so that we can adjust course and mitigate their concerns, answer any questions they have, and implement their ideas in alignment with scholar achievement. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 47  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Based on prior data available within the School Quality Snapshot, only 85% of parents say that the staff regularly communicate with them about how parents can help their children. This was also a finding of the November 2017 IIT which stated that "the school leader regularly reinforces high expectations for students through frequent communications with parents so that they are aware of what is happening in their child’s school and classroom." However, the IIT found that "opportunities for reciprocal communication that connects families and staff in a manner that would promote conversations about student needs and supports for their achievement is a challenge for the school. Parents stated that written communications are often too technical and wordy and not consistently translated." Preliminary parent feedback has voiced a desire to visit classrooms during the instructional day and volunteer at the school. As such, the school will be opening a Parent Room in 2018-19, and will be dedicating time and resources to more consistent and accessible family engagement. The school will continue communicating with families through our monthly class newsletters, Principal’s meetings, phone blasts, and progress reports and will make more consistent efforts to ensure these are translated for families. In addition, the school community will be informed of opportunities to volunteer and visit their scholars' classrooms. The priority area is to promote dialogue among parents and the school community on scholar learning and empowering them to use data. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 48  P.S. 194’s vision is to build strong family and community ties, fostered thorough our identification as a community school. We welcome the community by offering a wide variety of services to scholars and families to develop the whole child – emotionally, socially, and academically. We will partner with various community based organizations to provide dental, vision and health services, after-school programming that includes homework and academic support, and art and recreation programs through Expanded Learning Time (ELT). Parents will continue to be invited to monthly scholar performances, classroom celebrations, and award ceremonies, and we are committed to improving our communication channels to increase attendance at such events. Each month, we will host parent workshops and scholar celebrations to empower parents to be active partners in their child’s education. Parent workshops are designed to address the needs identified by the parent body. These will be primarily geared to communicate the academic needs of scholars and how parents can support their children’s learning. For example, the Principal has monthly meetings such as Understanding the Next Generation Standards in ELA and Math, Supporting Our English Language Learners, Supporting Our scholars with IEPs, and more. Also, we communicate scholar data and progress with our families through progress reports and “open door” parent engagement sessions on Tuesdays. Other initiatives to foster family and community ties include: organizing special events such as Spirit Days, beautifying our school to make it scholar-centered, and communicating with families through newsletters, calendars, and surveys. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? The doors to PS 194 are always open. As families enter the building, one of the first rooms they come to is the Family Welcome Center where the pupil accounting staff and Community School Director work. The room is designed for both work and leisure. It is equipped with a meeting area, work space, couch, games and books. It is a space where they can access information pertaining to their specified needs. As we start the 2018-19 school year, we intend to have a dedicated Family Room as well where parents can collaborate and plan family events. We welcome families through the use of meetings based on needs identified through their survey responses. We also leverage the Tuesday parent engagement time to facilitate the same. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? We allocate additional time during the school day, as well as parent engagement time on Tuesdays, where parents and teachers can share best practices with one another and take on leadership roles in the community. We will also collaborate with our SLT, PTA and Community School Team to facilitate the same. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? We will engage the community and families through workshops, adult continuing education classes, as well as events throughout the school year. Parents will have opportunities to learn from their scholars through various means including classroom participation and scholar-led conferences. Teachers will leverage the dedicated family engagement time on Tuesdays to foster these meaningful relationships. An open line of communication will be present between families and school staff through Class Dojo and social media (Instagram, FaceBook, and Twitter). What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 49  Type of Support Rationale Workshops Adult Education Classes Progress Reports Parent Workshops Facilitate information based on parent survey interests Support our families with enhancing their life's circumstances Shared information around scholar achievement to facilitate increased dialogue Share information with parents around programs schoalrs are using in school (and can use at home), such as: iReady, MyOn, AIS services, etc. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Partnership with Children, Harlem Hospital, Smile, NY Cares, Harlem Children'sZone Family partnerships with CBO: Our CBOplans workshops to support families and promote higher levels of family engagement. Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? We would like at least 12% of families to participate in adult education classes. We are partnering with Harlem Children’s Zone in the hopes to meet this goal. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? Data around all subjects, as well as socio-emotional data from various supports (i.e. school assessment summative and formative data; OORS reporting; teacher anecdotals). Families will also have access to the on-line NYCDOE data portal so they can access important information regarding their child's progress. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, there will be a 15% increase in positive responses pertaining to classroom visitation and opportunities to volunteer at the school as measured by the School Survey. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 50 List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Scholar Attendance Framework: Supportive Environment Average Math Proficiency Rating Average ELA Proficiency Rating 2018-19 RSCEP-R 51  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Parents are invited to scholar performances which are held in alignment with monthly ceremonies to recognize scholar success, which will enable them to better understand the culture of the school as well as scholar expectations . Parents are also invited to classroom academic celebrations. Host frequent parent workshops and conferences so that families can learn more about their children’s education (general education, ELLs, and SWDs) and invite parents to participate in the classrooms during ELT with their children during parent engagement time on Tuesdays. All families will receive additional social and health services through our various community partnerships (i.e., Operation Warm Coat, NY Foundling, Smile New York, Harlem Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Families, teachers, scholars, and other school staff Average ELA and Math Proficiency Rating; Framework: Supportive Environment; Attendance October 2018 through June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Community School Director, Parent Coordinator Parent surveys, feedback forms Families and teachers Average ELA and Math Proficiency Rating; Framework: Supportive Environment September 2018 through June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Community School Director, Parent Coordinator Parent surveys, feedback forms Scholars and Families Average ELA and Math Proficiency Rating; Framework: Supportive Environment; Attendance September 2018 through June 2019 Administration, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Community School Director, Parent Coordinator Family surveys, feedback forms, and New Visions Data Sorter and Heat Map 2018-19 RSCEP-R 52  Hospital, Warby Parker, Harlem Children's Zone) Multiple modes of communication, in varying languages, will be used to keep families informed of school events. (i.e. Parent Newsletters, phone blasts, fliers, monthly calendars, ClassDojo, social media) Families Average ELA and Math Proficiency Rating; Framework: Supportive Environment September 2018 through June 2019 Administration, Teachers, Community School Director, Parent Coordinator, CBOs Family surveys, feedback forms Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scholar and family incentives, family functions, parent workshops targeted to interest, parent newsletters, social media, progress reports for families, adult educational programs, mailings, fliers Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, there will be a 8% increase in the percentage of parents responding to invitations to classroom and school-wide celebrations. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In house survey created will indicate parent insight regarding communication and classroom volunteerism. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 53  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 98% percent of scholars in grades Pre-K through five will participate in expanded learning time programs that integrate academics, the arts and recreation (karate, music, etc.), mindfulness (yoga, circle time, etc.) and are targeted to individual student needs. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. The first hour of the ELT is compulsory. The Community School Director (CSD) and P.S. 194 staff will communicate with parents through fliers, meetings, and letters. The ELT program will include a welcome balance of activities throughout the week to entice scholar participation. The daily classroom teachers will be staffed to support the ELT so that the day is seamless for all. In September, an informational table will be set up during after school dismissal to recruit families. Throughout the year, attendance will be monitored and staff will follow up as needed with families. The CSD will work with the Administration and Social Emotional Learning Team to identify targeted scholars and families for the scholars in the voluntary program. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 54   What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? The ELT program reflects a focus on academic and artistic skills. All scholars in grades pre-kindergarten through five will participate in content area and enriching artistic instruction that is aligned with our Next Generation Standards and Blueprint for the Arts. The programming will be adjusted throughout the year to ensure that the individual needs of scholars are met. Staff will utilize the data received on varying assessments to inform programmatic decisions In addition, we will leverage our Character Development curriculum during this time to ensure that all scholars are supported holistically. Our English Language Learners, scholars with disabilities and general education population will benefit from these experiences. We will inform our families of our offerings and they will have opportunities to participate with their scholars via performances and class visitation. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. Key personnel responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program are school-based staff. Including administration, teachers and educational assistants. They will work with collaboratively to implement and oversee the program. Our community partners will also support our ELT with the contracting of artistic partners, and community events where scholars can participate after the compulsory hour. We will evaluate the impact of the programming on scholar achievement by monitoring scholars’ progress in mathematics, science, and ELA based on their assignments and performance tasks. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The ELT program will begin September 5, 2018 and end in June 25, 2019. it will be implemented and completed with school based teacher support. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Monies to pay for educational assistants for scholars with mandated needs, teacher and supervisory participation, per session or pro rota, artistic partners, and academic materials and resources (i.e. iReady, myON, RULER, etc) to ensure that all programs are implemented with fidelity are necessary to ensure the program thrives. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 55  Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks By February 2019, scholar attendance will be at 98% and achievement should see an increase based in mathematics, science, and ELA based on their assignments, assessments, and performance tasks. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use our beginning, interim and end of year data, as well as scholar work to assess progress. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 56  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, we will provide families with diverse opportunities to engage in family activities that are in alignment with supporting families' social-emotional needs such as The Incredible Years, a 16 week parenting group, and monthly workshops based on family interest such as computer literacy, financial literacy and productive play. We will measure the diversity of our opportunities with sign-in sheets and feedback forms at then end of each session. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Scholar Attendance Framework: Supportive Environment Framework: Collaborative Teachers Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service NY Foundling All scholars Partnership with Children All scholars Harlem Hospital All scholars Harlem Children’s Zone All scholars LEAP All scholars Assist scholars in crisis, family counseling and parent engagement. Support scholars with socio-emotional needs, attendance benchmarks, parent engagement and community partnerships. Support with community initiatives such as annual coat distribution and resources for identified STH population. Provide medical assistance and support to families and scholars Provide after-school services after ELT hours. Provide enrichment opportunities with a focus on dance and theater. After the Receivership Public Hearing, it was requested that we expand LEAP Partnerships to include Music and Step. Step is beginning Tuesday, March 19, 2019. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 57  2. 3. 4. Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. The team will continue to work closely with the School Leadership Team to analyze school data; prioritize the school’s needs and next steps and strategically plan activities and supports provided by the lead CBO and other partner organizations. The strands of work will continue to include: Teaching and Learning Leadership and Pedagogical Practices; Expanded Learning Opportunities; Physical and Mental Health Programming and Family Engagement and Support. As a part of the Teaching and Learning Leadership, the CBO will support Administration and teachers in developing, implementing and monitoring an effective strategy for change and continuous improvement that involves the use of structures, resources and best practices to create a coherent set of action plans for positive and learning outcomes. Administration and CBO will work collaboratively to ensure the pillars of Community Schools are implemented to ensure a successful school year. CBOs and Administration will partner in brainstorming and implementing action plans that assist in the goals of the Community School. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight 2018-19 RSCEP-R 58  Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Key personnel will continue to work together to implement the programming which includes: School Administration, the Lead CBO with support from the Community School Director and other school staff and leadership. The team will collaborate around developing responsive programming to plan effective and interactive workshops for internal and external members of the school community. Those individuals included in the Community School Team are: School Administration, Community School Director, Data Specialist, Parent Leaders and School Staff Leaders. This team is scheduled to meet monthly to ensure data trends, community events and outcomes are analyzed and monitored so that outcomes can be assessed. The New Visions Data Sorter will be utilized by all key members of the school community to track and monitor attendance trends, interventions and school data needed to support scholar achievement. Data collected will be utilized to evaluate work both to inform decisions on how specific intervention might be improved and to measure the progress toward end-of-year outcomes. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Partner CBOs, Pre-K through 5th grade teachers, school leadership, and Community School Director. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 5, 2018 to June 25, 2019. Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 59  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Scholars will be pulled in groups of 4-6 at least two - three times a week with the AISproviders. Services will be provided during the school day, as well as after school (during ELT). Selected scholars will meet one-on-one with a tutor through Reading Partners and/or Reading Rescue. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) K-2 Scholars: - Scholars performing in the bottom 1/3 in Phonics, Reading, and Math based on school-wide and classroom assessments. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Scholars will participate in a structured, sequential and cumulative phonics/spelling program; as well as, guided and shared reading. 3-5 Scholars: - Scholars who performed below the median score between a level 2 or level 3 on the State Assessment. Mathematics K-2 Scholars: - Scholars performing in the bottom 1/3 in Math based on school-wide and classroom assessments. Scholars will participate in a program that will assist them in acquiring strategies and skills needed to become proficient inmathematics; strengthening grade appropriate number sense; reviewing essential basic math skills; and becoming Scholars will be pulled in groups of 4-6 at least two - three times a week with the AISproviders. Services will be provided during the school day, as well as after school (during ELT). 2018-19 RSCEP-R 60 effective problem-solvers, learn to model with math, and construct viable mathematical arguments. The science instructor utilizes Amplify science to develop exploratory hands on learning aligned with the Science. Classroom teachers are using Pass Port Curriculum to develop interdisciplinary projects. Small group, whole class Services will be provided during the school day. Small group, whole class Services will be provided during the school day, as well as after school (during ELT). Small group, Individual Services will be provided during the school day. Strategies are used to counselscholars with emotional needs such as role playing, peer remediation, and referrals . Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 3-5 Scholars: - Scholars who performed below the median score between a level 2 or level 3 on the State Assessment. All scholars are receiving science instruction from a content specific Instructor a minimum of once per week. All scholars are receiving Social Studies instruction in the classroom by their classroom teachers. One aspect of the Expanded Learning Time will be project based learning that will be aligned to the social studies scope and sequence. SEL Team will meet monthly to implement and monitor scholar with both academic and behavior issues for both scholars and teachers. Scholars who show a pattern will be referredfor at-risk services. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 61  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 60 scholars in temporary housing who are currently attending our school. According to the DOE systems, approximately 50% of the scholars are doubled up and residing with another family that they may or may not be related to. The other 50% of our scholars in temporary housing reside in shelters. Over the course of the year, families’ transition in and out of these living arrangements but the ratio is similar. Also, the number of families who 2018-19 RSCEP-R 62  2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Services being provided to scholars living in transition include the following: are doubling up is higher than reported.  workshops for families to increase their job readiness such as resume writing and interviewing skills  adult education classes to prepare parents/guardians to enter or return to the workforce (i.e., GED classes, trade classes) family and individual counseling for scholars and their families   holistic health workshops that focus on physical and mental wellness  support with improving scholars’ attendance (i.e., daily reminders, group activities with chronically absent scholars  Resources: uniforms, backpacks, and school supplies Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 63 NA 2018-19 RSCEP-R 64  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We will engage in community building, outreach to various universities, seek candidates through DOE mediums (i.e. New Teacher Finder), attend Hiring Fairs, engage in a two-step interview process, and leverage data to engage in purposeful assignments. The professional development that we offer will be varied based on teacher needs. Teachers will engage in research, inter-visitation, coaching cycles, and lesson studies to facilitate high-quality professional development. We will also provide clear expectations to engage our community. We aim to offer staff the resources and professional development they need so that they are invested in the community and return each year. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Weekly professional development (PD) will be provided to staff to enable all scholars to meet Next Generation Standards. A comprehensive PD plan is drafted with input from staff after a careful review of data regarding pedagogical and scholar need. The plan is revisited throughout the year and modified as needed. Instructional staff have the opportunity to select from a menu of options for at least one cycle of PD within the year. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 RSCEP-R 65  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Our transition plans include: 1. June and August parent meeting; 2. Parent engagement activities throughout the school year celebrating individual cultures; 3. workshops around school curriculum to facilitate parent academic involvement, and 4. sharing intervention services and community partners to enhance scholar outcomes. 5. End of year open house for preschoolers and their families to spend time in our kindergarten classrooms. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers review assessment alignment with curriculum and state standards to ensure rigor and mastery of grade level expectations. Additionally, we ensure that we have a balance of summative and formative assessments to create a clear portrait of scholar mastery. We use the assessment results to guide our professional development, improve our instruction and scholar outcomes. Instructional staff are also involved in the decision making regarding which assessments are selected to suit the instructional needs of the school. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Federal $163,004 $16,979 $55,278 x x x 2018-19 RSCEP-R 66 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11 5A, 5C, 5D, 8, 10 5C, 5D, 5E  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal $53,952 $12,366 0 $1,937,413 Tax Levy (FSF) Local x x x 5A, 5C 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6, 11 2, 3, 4,5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 2018-19 RSCEP-R 67  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 68  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 194 Countee Cullen, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S. 194 Countee Cullen will support parents and families of Title I scholars  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality 2018-19 RSCEP-R 69  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and scholars with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating scholars , parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and secondary Act. schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their scholar academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 70  supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 194M Countee Cullen, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA)Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of scholars participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual scholar assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 RSCEP-R 71  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by:  offering parent engagement hours on Tuesdays from 2:40 p.m. to 3:20 p.m.  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  organizing workshops based on parent survey responses  monthly school-wide newsletters to communicate academic, and social information and events    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for scholars and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities Parent/Guardian responsibilities include: I promise to:  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 72   participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   Scholar Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn 2018-19 RSCEP-R 73  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 RSCEP-R 74  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 194 Countee Cullen is an elementary school with grades Pre-K through 5. We have a total of 197 scholars with thirty-seven English Language Learner scholars. Our ENL scholars speak a variety of languages including: Arabic, Bengali, Mandinka, Haitian Creole, Papiamento, French, Wolof, and Spanish. Scholar's proficiency levels range from Entering to Commanding . There are: 9 Entering scholars, 7 Emerging scholars; 9 Transitioning scholars; 10 Expanding scholars; and 2 Commanding scholars. These scholars receive English as a Second Language classes with a certified ENL teacher, Wanda White. She uses a push-in/pull-out model where our Entering and Expanding scholars receive 180 minutes of pull-out ENL focused on developing basic oral, and written proficiency. They then receive an additional 180 minutes of ENL via push-in where they receive English Support in the ELA content. Our Transitioning and Expanding scholars receive 180 minutes via the push-in model where they receive English support in the ELA content. Our ENL teacher provides instruction solely in English with second language support based on scholar need. We are using the direct instruction supplemental program to provide additional, intensive literacy support for our ELLs in Kindergarten through Fifth Grade. Scholars are chosen based on NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores, as well as our beginning of the year curriculum assessment data including Running Records, iReady and Ready diagnostic data, Gates-MacGinitie data (K-2) and our initial CCLS math assessment. We currently have thirty seven ELLs in grades Kindergarten through Fifth attending our ELL Achievement Program. Our ELL Achievement program will run from January 4, 2019 through May 26, 2019. Scholars will be grouped in grade bands (kindergarten and first grade, second grade and third grade, and, fourth grade and fifth grade). Kindergarten and first grade meets on Wednesdays, second and third grade meets on Thursdays, and fourth and fifth grade meets on Fridays. The program will begin on January 4, 2019 and continue through May 26, 2019 on Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays from 2:40 p.m. to 4:20 p.m. The ELL Achievement program runs for a total of 19 weeks, which is 57 sessions. There will be one ENL teacher and one ELA teacher for the program. to support scholars' holistic English and academic development. During each session, the ELA teacher and ENL teacher will co-teach to provide scholars with both content-specific instruction as well as English language support. The sessions will focus on speaking and listening, and reading and writing skills, with an emphasis on reading and writing. Our targeted scholars performed lowest on these portions of the NYSESLAT relative to their peers. The ENL teachers will use Fountas and Pinnell running records, Ready, IReady ELA data, and other relevant data to help drive personalized instruction. In writing, the teachers will focus on Information writing, aligned with Common Core Learning Standards and the TC Writing Rubric. The teachers will use the CCLS-aligned TC (Teacher's College) Information writing rubric to assess scholars’ on-demand writing and tailor lesson objectives to meet the needs of individual scholars. The Kindergarten and first grade group will focus on speaking and listening skills as well as vocabulary development. The second and third grade group will emphasize reading and writing skills with an emphasis on sentence fluency and word choice, and the fourth and fifth grade group will focus on reading and writing skills with an 2018-19 RSCEP-R 75  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information emphasis on sentence fluency, word choice and organization. The language of instruction will be English with an ENL certified teacher. The ENL Teacher will utilize the school's curriculum resources and materials from various programs like ReadyGEN and Fundations. In addition, the ELL Teachers will utilize the school's mobile computer lab to access online resources, including iReady and MyOn. Additional guided reading sets will be purchased to support reading instruction. Lastly, scholars will use picture cards and other teacher-made materials that will provide our beginner ELLs access to the general education curriculum and promote scholar mastery. The ENL teachers will notify parents about the ENL Achievement Program in a letter given to parents in their preferred languages. Scholar attendance will be recorded and maintained by the ENL teacher. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Each year we provide differentiated professional development in order to meet the needs of our individual teachers.As a school community, teachers receive professional development using the Danielson rubric, specifically indicators 1E: Designing Coherent Instruction; 3B: Questioning and Discussion Techniques; and 3D: Using Assessment in Instruction. In addition, our ENL Teacher will receive professional development around 1C: Setting Instructional Outcomes and 2B: Establishing a Culture for Learning so that scholars internalize expectations. Our ENL teacher will be attending a series of professional development workshop, which will further her knowledge on planning instruction to support ELL Achievement through CCLS-aligned Instruction. The Professional Development workshops are provided by the Manhattan Field Support Center, and the dates of the workshops are as follows: 12/19/2018; 1/18/2019; 3/22/2019; and 5/17/2019.The topics covered will include: Academic Vocabulary development and oral language development, and Supporting ELL scholar with complex texts and critiquing the reasoning of others. The ELL Teacher will turnkey the information from professional development to ELA classroom teachers.She will turnkey the information to our English Language Arts teachers: so that they can collaboratively develop a shared understanding of how vocabulary development supports scholars across all disciplines. They will also participate in shared research on the development of oral language so that they can support the scholars with the same oral language development during the program and across activities.Topics Covered: Academic vocabulary development and oral language developmentSchedule: January 9, January 23, March 27 and May 22, 2017 2:40p-4:00pProvider: ENL Teacher Audience: ELA Teachers (K-5)Rationale: Our ELL Teacher and ELA Teachers will participate in a Professional Learning Community (PLC) where they delve deeply into academic vocabulary and implementing best practices to develop scholars' oral skills. Teachers will monitor scholars’ vocabulary development and discuss ways they can leverage their learning to implement strategies with their ELL scholars.Topics Covered: academic vocabulary, supporting ELLs with complex texts and critiquing the reasoning of othersSchedule: January 30, February 20, March 20, April 24, and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 76  Part C: Professional Development June 5, 2017 - 2:40p-4:00p Rationale: Our ELL Teachers and ELA Teachers will participate in a PLC where they continue to delve deeply into academic vocabulary and scholars accessing complex texts and critiquing the reasoning of others. Teachers will monitor scholars’ vocabulary development and discuss ways they can leverage their learning to implement strategies with their ELL scholars. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We surveyed families and at the beginning of the year and they stated they would like additional strategies to support their scholar at home. Our goal is to provide parents with the strategies and support they need to propel our scholars’ achievement. We plan to have a parent orientation on December 13, 2016 (during a previously planned event) for all families who have a scholar involved in our ELL Achievement program. Our Parent Coordinator will work in tandem with our ELL Coordinator to provide families with information about the program, as well as strategies that will support scholars with homework and school work. Parents will have the opportunity to engage in activities with their children with the support of our ELL Coordinator. Topic 1: ELL Achievement Program - ELL Orientation Session Rationale: Support and develop English language acquisition (reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills) Date: Tuesday, January 10th Time: 2:40pm Name of Provider: ELL Teacher/Ms. Harrison Audience: All ELL families Topic 2: ELL Achievement Program - NYSESLAT Information Rationale: Information regarding the NYSESLAT Date: Tuesday, March 17th Time: 2:40pm Name of Provider: ELL Teachers/Ms. Harrison Audience: All ELL families Topic 3: ELL Achievement Program - Preparing for Summer and End of Program Celebration Rationale: Information regarding resources for the summer vacation Date: Thursday, May 16th Time: 2:40pm Name of Provider: ELL Teacher/Ms. Harrison Audience: All ELL families The ELL Teacher will have a conference session with each parent, outlining the current level of performance of the scholar, as well as clearly delineating next steps to help their scholar succeed. In addition, we will invite families in for trimester celebrations, where scholars will present and celebrate their work. The final culminating family celebration will also include a Multicultural Celebration where scholars, teachers, and parents will share their cultural traditions through food, apparel, history, flags, and art. Families will be notified of the aforementioned 2018-19 RSCEP-R 77 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities activities with written notices, translated in their native language. Families will receive phone calls from our automated telephone system, also in their native language. Additional workshops are conducted throughout the year to help inform parents of academic activities to help guide children in developing English Language skills at home based on additional feedback from the school community. Parents will be notified of workshops with letters in their home languages. Parents are notified of these activities via the monthly ENL newsletter, the school calendar and our phone messaging system. Letters are translated into the native language which is usually done by our Parent Coordinator. When our Parent Coordinator does not know the home language of the family, she reaches out to other staff and members of the community for support. At times our Parent Coordinator reaches out to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for phone interpretation when necessary. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ N/A Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) NA  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA NA N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2018-19 RSCEP-R 78  2018-19 RSCEP-R 79  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 05 School Name Countee Cullen Borough Manhattan School Number 194 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mieasia Edwards Coach Caquandra Grace ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Wanda White Teacher/Subject Area Caquandra Grace Teacher/Subject Area Shalibra Frazier Related-Service Provider Shalibra Frazier Superintendent Danika Rux Assistant Principal Kerianne Harrison Coach School Counselor Xiomara Rivera Parent Michael Green Parent Coordinator Clara Pena Field Support Center Staff Member Hong Ying Shen Other (Name and Title) Aurora Quipit, Speech Teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 211 2018-19 RSCEP-R 80 Total number of ELLs 39 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 18.48%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 NA NA NA NA NA NA Lang. NA NA NA NA NA NA Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use a combination of formative, curriculum-embedded, and teacher-created assessments to guide our instructional planning for ELLs. To gather English Language Arts data for our ELL scholars, we use Fountas and Pinnell reading assessments; i-Ready, an online program that combines an adaptive assessment with instant reporting, and engaging differentiated instruction customized for each student's unique needs; Ready, a paper and pencil grade level reading comprehension assessment; and teacher made assessments aligned with the NYSESLAT reading and writing assessments. Additionally, we use data from the NYSESLAT and AMAO to plan instruction for our English Language Learners. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The LAP Team meets at the beginning of the year and monthly thereafter to review our ELL scholar data. We look for overall trends, and set individual goals for our scholars based on their individual data, command levels, and school trends. Additionally, classroom teachers assess scholars in across all grades six times a year to monitor their ELA progress 2018-19 RSCEP-R 81  using i-Ready and Fountas and Pinnell. Grades kindergarten through fifth are also assessed using the Fry word lists, Words Their Way, and we use additional data for grades three to five, such as the NYS assessments and Ready assessments to gauge our ELLs growth and learning. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use the our data from the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, running records, a teacher made test aligned with the NYSESLAT and the ELL Periodic Assessments as our primary baseline and summative data sources. However, the success of our ENL/ELA program is largely based on the NYSESLAT scores and the EDAT (ELL Data Analysis Tool) results. Success on the NYSESLAT is measured when the student moves up 1 or 2 levels. The EDAT results provide a closer look at increases and decreases in achievement. Additional evidence also includes ELL Periodic Assessments, program assessments (ReadyGen, Fountas & Pinnell, Wilson Fundations, TERC Investigations, Science and Social Studies Scope & Sequence, BrainPop ESL and i-Ready (Computer Programs), and teacher created performance assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data is gathered, it enables us to structure our interventions.Data is used to plan instructional groupings and stand-alone and integrated instructional models. Scholar groupings are determined based on command levels, data and grade level.Sometimes it is beneficial to work with a small group of scholars rather than pushing in.Also, we can differentiate groups as needed based on scholars goals and needs. Our data collection and planning facilitates our ability to create flexible groups based on data and to use a combination of push-in and pull-out instruction to target specific scholars and skills. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] At P. S. 194 we use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the RTI framework. For each English language learner who scores below specified levels of performance on the annual English language proficiency assessment, our school provides additional support services to the scholar, taking into consideration the following criteria: • Number of years of instruction in an English as a New Language program • English and home language literacy • Content area and socio-emotional support needs of scholars with inconsistent/interrupted formal education (SIFE) • English and home language literacy needs of long-term ELLs • Results on the annual English Language Proficiency assessment exam • English as a second language teacher recommendation • Content area teacher recommendation • Parent or guardian request • Sample of student work in English These extra support services, including the aim of prevention and early intervention through a tiered system of instructional support, are provided by collaboratively working together (teachers, administrators, and service providers) to create an instructional plan for supporting our ELLs. General Education classroom teachers and the ENL teacher provide differentiated learning through small group scaffolded instruction. Teachers are provided with best practices ESL methodologies that are research-based and appropriate for linguistically diverse learners to help scholars gain access to content. The Instructional Cabinet and the RTI Team meet twice a month to review scholar data such as iReady, MoSL, scholar work, and curriculum documents to monitor scholar progress and instructional decisions. Teachers, RTI personnel, and paras meet every six weeks to analyze scholars' work and progress to develop instructional next steps and for each tier group, and determine if scholars should be moved to or from a given tier. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. According to the data patterns across proficiency levels and grades on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT, our ELLs consistently score higher in the listening and speaking modalities, while many of our ELLs continue to struggle in the reading and writing modalities. Therefore, we use the scholar's strengths in speaking and listening to build content knowledge and domain-specific vocabulary so that scholars have a scaffolded point of entry into reading and writing content. We leverage our 2018-19 RSCEP-R 82  Fountas and Pinnell reading data and i-Ready reading and math data for all grades (K-5) along with NYS ELA and Math data for grades 3-5 to inform our ELL programs. Additionally, we are working towards the creation of thematic units to support scholars with the same. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL Teacher has opportunities to work with classroom teachers during common planning periods to disseminate and share data findings.Once per week, all teachers have 106 minutes of planning each week, which gives additional time for teachers to look at scholar work to monitor scholar learning and progress, as well as plan for instruction.Unit plans for all subject areas and grade are shared with all pedagogical staff, which helps the ENL teacher to plan and adjust lessons.We also have four week cycles of professional learning opportunities, where we delve into data analysis to plan our instruction according to scholars' strength and areas for strengthening. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ELL program at P.S. 194 implements the stand alone and integrated ENL model of instruction. Scholars are placed in groups according to their grade levels (K & 1st, 2nd & 3rd, and 4th & 5th)) and their English proficiency levels (Entering/Emergent/Transitioning/Expanding/Commanding). The ENL teacher provides scholars with the mandated number of minutes and units of study as per CR Part 154. The standalone ENL component is provided by the ENL teacher. The integrated ENL component is provided by the ENL teacher collaborating with the General Education teachers. The General Education Teachers also turnkeys information and strategies to the Special Education Teachers in our Integrated Co-Teaching classrooms to ensure that scholars needs are being met. b. TBE program. If applicable. We do not have a Transitional Bilingual Program at this time. c. DL program. If applicable. We do not have a Dual Language program at this time. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teacher collaborates with all classroom teachers who have ELLs in their classrooms to create a schedule that ensures the mandated amount of instructional minutes per student per proficiency level are delivered through the push-in pull-out. The ENL teacher and administration keeps records and ensures that the schedule is followed and that scholars are receiving the mandated amount of instructional minutes. Entering scholars are programmed to receive 180 minutes of stand alone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ELA. Emerging scholars are programmed to receive 180 minutes of stand alone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ELA. Transitioning scholars are programmed to receive 90 minutes of stand alone ENL and 90 minutes of integrated ELA. Expanding scholars are programmed to receive 180 minutes of integrated ELA. Commanding scholars are programmed to receive 90 minutes of integrated ELA. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 83  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At P.S. 194, the content areas are delivered in English in and out of the classroom by the classroom teachers and the ENL teacher. Best practices methodologies are applied using the Sheltered English Instruction model. Content, instruction, and assessments are differentiated, scaffolded, and supplemented with Higher Order Thinking Skills aligned to NYS ESL standards and Common Core learning standards. We use the Teacher's College Reading and Writing curriculum and the Terc Investigations math curriculum, and Contexts for Learning and are aligned to the Common Core ELA and Math learning standards. The ENL teacher supports ELLs by scaffolding curricula and instruction to make content comprehensible to ELLs. Additionally, the ENL teacher uses resources and materials that are culturally diverse, such as read aloud books, classroom library books in various home languages, and hands on materials, to engage students in lessons and stimulate discussions. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Scholars are not evaluated in their home languages because scholars are instructed in a stand alone ENL or integrated ELA program. However, staff that speak languages other than English are often asked to informally speak with ELL scholars in their home language to assess their understanding in their home language. This helps the ENL teacher and the classroom teachers to strategically plan next steps and/or interventions for scholars. Additionally, we use multiple entry points to foster language and vocabulary development as well as meet the demands of the CCLS. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE scholars are provided with support via the Bridges Core Instructional Elements, a bridge program that prepares scholars with limited academic or limited English skills to succeed in their educational career path. b. Newcomers are supported with scaffold support and literacy/math strategies to meet their individual needs. c. Developing ELLs are provided support in vocabulary learning and writing scaffolds. d. Long Term ELLs will be provided with extra support in reading and writing, as well as purposeful differentiated instruction to secure skills to meet grade level expectations and demands. e. Former ELLs will be supported up to two years after exiting ELL status with scaffolding their metacognitive development. Teachers work collaboratively in grade teams to analyze scholar data, such as running records, scholar writing and math performance tasks, etc., to determine scholars' levels, set individual goals, and devise next steps for instruction. Teachers use multiple entry points by providing scholars with various opportunities to experience Common-Core Learning Standards in all subject areas, and each individual scholar engages in work that is of appropriate grade level complexity that support their individual academic needs. We use programs such as iReady Reading and Mathematics, and Reading Rescue to provide scholars with additional differentiated instruction. Additionally, all ELLs and former ELLs for up to two years after testing out are eligible for ELL testing accommodations, in addition to any accommodations on their IEPs or 504 Plans, if applicable. A list of NYS-approved accommodations may be found in the School Administrator's Manual (SAM) for each respective test (i.e., mathematics, science and social studies). 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The classroom teachers, special education teachers, and the ENL teacher articulate and collaborate to ensure that the individual needs of ELLs with learning disabilities are addressed in their IEP goals and ENL goals based on various ELL assessment data. The ENL teacher uses the SIOP model of instruction which employs the best practices for sheltering instruction to ELLs with special needs. SIOP lesson features include the following: adaptation of content, links to background, links to past learning, strategies, modeling, guided practice, independent practice, comprehensible input, hands-on learning, meaningful and rigorous leaning tasks that promote engagement, integration of all 4 language processes, varied and flexible 2018-19 RSCEP-R 84  learning group options, and ongoing assessment procedures. Scholars are also exposed to real world application of concepts in the classroom and through field trips. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment by having the ENL teacher push into the classroom to provide differentiated instruction based on individual scholars’ needs and goals. The ENL teacher has access to unit plans for all subjects and plans with the classroom teachers to ensure that scholars are receiving instruction that is of appropriate grade level complexity, standards aligned, and in the least restrictive environment. ELLs who are also scholars with disabilities (SWD) receive accommodations that apply both to ELLs and SWDs, as appropriate. ELLs with disabilities are not exempted from the NYSESLAT, and may use the test modifications and accommodations as detailed on their IEP when taking the NYSESLAT (and as permitted in the School Administrator’s Manual for the test). Response to Intervention (RTI) approaches will be applied to ELL scholars who enter with lower levels of proficiency in the home language survey, or if anticipated progress is not noted after a six week data cycle. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We offer targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math and other core content areas. For ELA and math, we use I-Ready, a digital online program combines an adaptive assessment with instant reporting, and engaging differentiated instruction customized for each student's unique needs. All subgroups have access to the program, which provides them with instruction and assessments that are based on their performance and needs. Additionally, many of our ELL scholars receive weekly one-to-one reading intervention with Reading Rescue specialists. These interventions also incorporates science, global connections, and other subject areas into their instruction. Our ELLs are held to the same high standards and expectations promoted and aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. Developing rigorous lessons assessing their needs while maintaining high performance standards and expectations is the core of the Principles of Learning, guided and organized by the NYCDOE, which ensures a learning environment of differentiated instruction. All ELLs are invited to attend our after school program whose focus is academic intervention in literacy and mathematics. During the school day, classroom teachers, cluster teachers, and support service providers will work with ELLs in small group scaffolded instruction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on the data and trends, writing and reading will be a targeted area for instruction. The ENL Teacher will improve in this area by leveraging a new digital program, BrainPop ESL. BrainPOP ESL is a comprehensive English language learning program that uses highly engaging animated movies to model conversational English while seamlessly introducing grammar concepts and vocabulary words. The program is leveled, with each level building upon earlier ones, thereby reinforcing vocabulary, grammar, pronunciation, reading comprehension, and writing skills. The building block structure enables scholars to master the language in a step-by-step process, giving them the confidence they need to read, write, and speak English. Additionally, the ENL teacher will use formative assessments to track scholar progress and development to plan instructional next steps. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Our school does not have a bilingual program. No ELL programs/services will be discontinued for ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs, curricular and extracurricular by letters sent home to parents in their preferred language. The ENL teacher uses the the push-in model to provide instruction in the classroom based on the daily lessons presented by the classroom teacher and scholar data. The presentation of the lesson by the ENL teacher is thoughtfully planned based on collaboration with the teacher and the needs of scholars. Scaffolds and supporting materials are used such as graphic organizers, pictures, hands-on models, etc. Entering and Emerging ELL scholars are given additional access to deepen their understanding of concepts and develop their skills when they receive pull-out instruction, which allows a seamless flow to scholar skill building. Scholars participate in a district-wide program held for five weeks on Saturday in the 2018-19 RSCEP-R 85  later part of the school year, and all scholars including ELLs are invited to participate in Extended Learning Time instruction, Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETTS) if applicable, School Psychologist, Guidance Counselor and Social Worker support as needed. ELLs fully participate in these programs as evidenced by the attendance records in after school and supplemental services. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs use a variety of instructional materials and technology to support their learning.They use Teacher’s College Reading and Writing project texts; participate in TERC mathematics investigations; science and global connections. Our digital learning materials include: BrainPop ESL, Myon, i-Ready Math, and i-Ready Reading. Also, we use the Fundations/Wilson Program, a multi-sensory language approach for language development. Fundations serves as a prevention program to help reduce reading and spelling failure. It is integral to a Multi-tiered System of Supports (MTSS) or Response to Intervention (RTI) framework, providing research-based instruction in Tier 1 as well as early intervention (Tier 2) for scholars at risk for reading difficulties. To support the implementation of an MTSS or RTI framework, progress monitoring is built into Fundations. This allows scholars requiring a more intensive program to be identified early before undergoing years of struggle. Instructional materials include: • Hardcover teacher manual per Fundations® Level with explicit day-by-day learning plans • Extensive collection of durable and consumable materials to demonstrate and practice concepts Math manipulatives are used in content area instruction. Guided reading books are used for teaching reading in subgroups. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our school provides bilingual dictionaries and glossaries in the student's home language. Some classroom libraries contain home language titles, and we are continually update our libraries with multilingual text with culturally diverse characters and topics. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our school ensures all required services/resources support and corresponde to ELLs' ages and grade levels. Newcomer, developing , long term, and former ELLs are grouped together based on their individual skills per scholars' data. We use data from the EDAT coupled with schoolwide data (Fountas and Pinnell running records, math and writing assessments) to group scholars appropriately, so that they can receive grade level rigorous instruction with scaffolds. Whenever possible, scholars receive ELL instructional services in their classroom. However, scholars also receive small group instruction, based on data findings, and scholars are seen during non-instructional blocks so that the pull-out is only minimally intrusive.. For example, all ELL scholars received instruction to improve their writing skill based on NYSESLAT data trends, and other scholars needed instruction with special emphasis on speaking. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school co-locates with another school; however, we occupy different floors. We occupy the first, second, and third floors. We serve elementary school scholars and the other school serves middle school scholars. Our ELLs have access to their own ENL Room, the library, and all other resources to ensure that all their academic, linguistic, and socio-emotional needs are met. Our lunchroom, gymnasium, and playground are shared daily at different time periods. Each school has a designated time to use each space, based on a schedule that is closely adhered to. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year, newly enrolled ELLs are invited to attend summer school, if space is permitted. In addition, there is a Meet and Greet Opportunity for families. The school counselor and parent coordinator conduct workshops 2018-19 RSCEP-R 86  for parents to become familiar to a new learning environment. Classroom teachers provide homework help workshops for parents. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? None 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our school does not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Administration strongly supports ENL professional development (PD). The ENL teacher is encouraged to attend at least one workshop per month. Administration asks that the ENL teacher turnkeys the information with all staff members, including classroom teachers, content area teachers, paraprofessionals, parent coordinator, and secretaries. Calendar of PD dates for the current year is to be determined. All staff is welcome to participate in ENL professional development opportunities. Administration supports new learning that can be used in the classroom to impact and enhance scholar learning and achievement. The Principal emails PD opportunities to staff monthly. There are resources for ELL educators on the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support (DELLSS) website. -The ELL Policy and Reference Guide -Native Langauge Arts -Response to Intervention -A video library -Professional development -Literacy and math development -And more 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English Language Learners. Fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers will be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For English as a New Language teachers, fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners. Professional development activities will be recorded through the use of agendas and attendance. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 87  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parent-Teacher conferences and the Tuesday parent engagement outreach afternoons are provided for annual meetings with parents of ELLs. We also reach out to parents via telephone to schedule meetings regarding scholars' progress. If parents are unable to meet in-person, a phone meeting is scheduled to ensure that ample time is given to discuss scholars' language development progress. Interpretation services will be provided by the parent coordinator or through the over-the-phone translation services through the NYC Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs meet with teachers to discuss their child's progress in behavior and academics. Parent phone calls also foster parental involvement of ELL scholars. For our fifth grade scholars, there is a Middle School workshop conducted by the Parent Coordinator to transition ELLs and parents from elementary to middle school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 88 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Mieasia Edwards, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 89  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 194 School DBN: 05M194 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Miesia Edwards Title Principal Kerianne Harrison Assistant Principal Clara Pena Parent Coordinator Wanda White ENL/Bilingual Teacher Michael Green Parent Caquandra Grace Teacher/Subject Area Shalibra Frazier Teacher/Subject Area Patrice Lewis N/A Coach Coach Xiomara Rivera School Counselor Danika Rux Hong Ying Shen Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Aurora Quipit Other Speech Teacher Shalibra Frazier Other Service Provider N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 6/29/18 2018-19 RSCEP-R 90  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 05M194 School Name: Countee Cullen Superintendent: Gale Reeves The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 194 asks parents or guardians to fill out a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) form when their child is admitted to the school. Parents or guardians are surveyed and interviewed about what language they prefer written and oral communication with the school. Student Emergency Contact cards also have a choice for the parent to indicate the language they prefer letters to be sent home or the spoken language through phone calls. After parents are surveyed with the HLIS, the pupil accounting secretary uploads the Home Language onto ATS so that the school community can access the language information of the students. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 91 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Parents' preferred languages for both written and oral communication are English, Spanish, Bengali and Wolof. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families The Parent Coordinator translates flyers to students informing parents about Middle School, Forums about the DOE, Cool Culture Pass to Pre-Kindergarten and Kindergarten students, Learning Leaders, Parent-Teacher Conference announcements, After-School Program Information, Testing Information/Calendar, and Community School Newsletter. Our school also disseminates letters to ELL students. These include Parent Survey and Program Selection Form, Placement letters, Entitlement letters, and Continuation letters. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 92  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? The Parent Coordinator and the guidance counselor who are bilingual translate and interpret during IEP meetings, parent meetings, parent workshops, parent professional development workshops. Some examples of parent professional development workshops are homework help and cooking workshops for families. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Welcome Poster is in the front of the school building on the left side so parents can be informed. School safety officers and the main office has Language ID Guides and cards that parents can point to indicating their language so they can be assisted. Parents' Bill of Rights and Parents' Guide to Language Access was disseminated at the beginning of the schoolyear in languages as indicated on their HLIS. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At the beginning of the schoolyear, parents are asked what language they prefer to receive information. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 93  Parent Survey and Selection forms are disseminated to parents of ELLs asking them to indicate their choice of English learning program. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 94 
