 02M289 School Name: I.S. 289 Principal: ZEYNEP OZKAN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: IS 289: Hudson River Middle School 310200010289 School Number (DBN): 02M289 BEDS Code: Grades Served: 6-8 School Address: 201 Warren Street Phone Number: (212) 571-9268 Fax: (212) 587-6610 School Contact Person: Sandy Leung Email Address: sleung@is289.org Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Zeynep Ozkan Stephen Husiak Patricia Laraia Stephen Husiak N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 02 Superintendent: Bonnie Laboy Superintendent’s Office Address: 333 7 th Avenue, 7 th Floor, NY, NY 10001 Superintendent’s Email Address: blaboy@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 212-356-3815 Fax: 212-356-7514 Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Manhattan, District 2 Executive Director: Yuet Chu Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 Seventh Ave, 8th floor, NY, NY 10001 Executive Director’s Email Address: YChu@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: (646) 470-0721 Fax: (917) 339-1765   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Zeynep Ozkan Stephen Husiak Carrie Coakley Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Not Applicable Anne Yaffe Tricia Joyce ReyCabrera Marlee Rosen Jessica Collins Christina DiZebba *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) FarzanaKapadia Rachel Glube Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview IS 289 provides a caring and challenging environment that promotes the development of agency among all students in their pursuit of becoming life-long learners and engaged citizens of their various communities.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. IS 289, The Hudson River Middle School, is a small, 300-student middle school in the Tribeca/ Battery Park City area of New York City. It is a dynamic learning community, thoughtfully organized to support its diverse student body in meeting high standards. The community combines high expectations with high levels of support, creating a bridge between challenging curriculum goals and students’ unique talents, needs and learning styles. IS 289 is a District 2 choice middle school, not a zoned school. Its Department of Education mandate is to serve a heterogeneous student body. The school selects students in the winter-spring from among applicants to its 6th grade. Our holistic assessment of applicants includes evidence of commitment to collaboration, attendance data and teacher recommendations. IS 289 has made a deliberate effort through its recruitment and selection process to create a diverse student body. Taking advantage of young people’s social tendencies and needs, we create opportunities for students to develop, test, revise, and refine their thinking and then communicate their understandings to a larger audience. The school has developed resources to meet the academic and social needs of its students and families. Currently, approximately 35% of our students are from neighboring elementary schools within two blocks of the school; the immediate neighborhood is predominantly white middle class. Another 35% of our students come from Chinatown schools; these students live 1.5 to 2.5 miles from the school. Most of the remaining students come from other District 2 schools, most of them in Greenwich Village, and very few from outside the district. The school houses three general education classes on a grade, grades 6 through 8, heterogeneously grouped, with a class size averaging 32 students. The faculty is departmentalized, with one teacher for each subject area — literacy, math, social studies, and science — on each grade level. We have one Spanish language teacher who teaches classes to both 7th and 8th grade students. We use block scheduling for the four core subjects. Other classes, taught for single periods, include physical education, advisories, and academic coaching. Small-group intervention classes focus primarily on reading and math, and are held during the school day. Each child is paired with an adult who serves as the child’s academic coach and who meets with the child in regular intervals every two or three weeks. Throughout the curriculum, there is continuity in instruction and a focus on creating rigorous experiences for students using lessons that are rooted in the workshop model of instruction. Except in mathematics, teachers use textbooks only as one of many resources; instead, classrooms have libraries rich with trade books, both fiction and non-fiction, maps, illustrations. Students also conduct research through well-informed internet searches and trips to museums and other sites of interest in the city. Student assessment is primarily through projects, many of which are integrations of learning in more than one content area. Faculty collaborate closely with one another to create a community of learners among students in a supportive environment. Among its partnerships, IS 289 maintains its work with the TC Reading and Writing Project, has become a NYC Partnership School with Facing History and Ourselves, and now works with the Inclusive Classrooms Project and Math in the City. The comprehensive after school program is completely coordinated by Manhattan Youth. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are.   About 20% of our students have Individualized Education Plans and receive the full continuum of services including ICT, SETSS, and related services including speech, counseling, occupational and physical therapy. We have a very small formal ELL population (rarely more than 3 students school-wide), but over 25% of our students were once identified as an English Language Learner and have since graduated from that designation. The IS 289 community speaks over 15 different languages in their homes. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. IS 289 made the most progress in strong family and community ties. The focus of the work in the 2017-2018 school year are in continuing a supportive environment along with rigorous instruction. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M289 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 283 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 9 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 30 24 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 50.0% % Attendance Rate 46.3% % Reduced Lunch 1.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 11.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 38.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.08 6% 22% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 75.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 39 39 96.7% 3.2% 23.3% 3.9% 44.2% 2.1% 2 22% 6.1 70.3% 91% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Rigorous instruction can be monitored in multiple ways. Standardized test data indicates that students perform better on state exams each year they are at IS289, however the faculty, students, and families, communicate a desire to have one performance assessment multiple times in a year that communicates student performance to families and students almost immediately. In 2014-2015, IS 289 made a goal to pilot assessment and feedback systems for the first year of a three year plan. This allowed the school to analyze its current assessment practices and needs as a whole school community. In doing so, each department was able to plan not only assessments of significant value, but also plan better feedback systems. In 2015-2016, year two of the assessment goals, the school piloted assessment plans to determine effective and efficient methods of assessment and feedback. This year, IS289 will include the assessments in confidential student progress reports accessible by parents online and monitor performance on multiple assessments throughout the year. This data will be used to monitor the impact of small group instruction. In the 2016-2017 school year, IS289 piloted the use of online assessments and running record modifications to better streamline data collection and use. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By May 2018, all core content teachers will design weekly small group instruction within the workshop model of instruction using assessment data from the classroom. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher's College Readers and Writers Project (TCRWP) and Teacher's College Inclusive Classrooms Project (TCICP) consultants will work with teachers, general and special education, on the efficient design of small groups based on classroom data. TCWRP Performance Assessment in Non-Fiction Writing All All Results and implications for instruction will be discussed with families in November and March family conferences. Reports will be included in June report cards. TCWRP BookBand Assessments, fiction Results and implications for instruction will be discussed with families in November and March family conferences. Reports will be included in June report cards. October, February, May 2018 Consultants from TCRWP and TCICP with designated teacher liaisons on each grade level. October, February, May Social Studies and Science Teachers on each grade General Education Literacy Teachers on each grade F&P Running Records SWD and ELLs October, February, May Special Education Case Managers on each grade Results and implications for instruction will be discussed with families in November and March family conferences. Reports will be included in June report cards. Current IEPs will reflect the updated assessments. Math Practices Assessment for Modeling in Mathematics Results and implications for instruction will be discussed with families in November and March family conferences. Reports will be included in June report cards. Math Periodic Assessment All SWD and ELLs October, February, May October, February, May General Education Math Teachers on each grade Special Education Case Managers on each grade 3 Results and implications for instruction will be discussed with families in November and March family conferences. Reports will be included in June report cards. Current IEPs will reflect the updated assessments. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Each academic coach will share the assessment data with families during each of the family conferences. Additionally, during the Curriculum Night at the start of the year, each grade team will outline and explain the type and purpose of each assessment. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The PTA will pay the consultant fees and the school will pay for the teachers to engage work with the consultants. Assessment and planning will occur during the school day with consultants and in co-teaching teams. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Immigrant C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In both November and February, co-planning teams will engage in protocols to look at student work and review students data. All co-planned lessons will include weekly small group teaching points based on this data. In early February 2018, the whole school will engage in a benchmark review of collected data and student groupings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instrument of measure will be through faculty co-planning notes and improvements as seen in the student performance data spreadsheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? After expanding our school's social and emotional support program through a partnership with Facing History and Facing Ourselves, the IS289 faculty and students have noted a continued desire to expand our language and structures to build an inclusive environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, all full time faculty will have engaged in professional development to expand our instructional repertoire around building a more inclusive environment as measured by the use of Facing History advisory lessons each week in two grades and the implementation of an 8th grade buddy system with 6th graders. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Expansion of advisory program for sixth grade. Maintenance of advisory program for eighth grade. Faculty professional development on the components of Reflective Classrooms. 6th and 8th grade advisory teachers all faculty Fall 2017 Winter 2018 Spring 2018 Facing History consultant and the advisory teachers September 2017 Facing History consultant and the full-time faculty. Facing History consultant and the full-time faculty Faculty professional development on the components of Reflective Classrooms and the impact of identity and bias in education. Participation in a Fall Summit with Facing History professionals. all faculty Fall 2017 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Students representatives will attend the Fall Summit with Facing History and eighth grade buddies will be selected to mentor and support incoming sixth grade students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The PTA will pay the consultant fees and the school will pay for the teachers to engage work with the consultants. Professional development for faculty will occur during the school day with consultants and in book club groups. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 6  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2018 and in May 2018, surveys from the GSA and SLT will indicate progress towards this goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The internal full community survey designed by the School Leadership Team (SLT), will be administered in January. The internal student survey designed by the Gender and Sexuality Alliance (GSA) will be administered in May. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the year end evaluation of the PD, the PD committee noted that the teacher leadership of the PD time was supportive of faculty interests. Because school goals were developed in conjunction with observations and meetings with teachers, and because faculty communicated their PD interests through a survey from the PD committee, PD was well aligned with school needs. It was also noted that faculty and admin want to ensure structures exist to revisit and reflect on instructional initiatives throughout the year. The Quality Review and School Survey indicate that teacher teams trust each other and respect one another, thus making the implementation of the above noted improvements important for maintaining the school’s culture of collegiality and professionalism. With three out of four special education teachers new to the school, this is a prime opportunity to create systems and routines for co-planning to increase student access and achievement in the curriculum. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) teams will have created template planning documents for small group instruction and classroom routines and will use them weekly. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Form new PD committee, administer faculty surveys, perform formative observations and initial planning conferences. Faculty Use TCICP consultant to plan with teachers in their co-planning teams. ICT teams Complete by the end of October School leadership and PD committee members Fall 2017 Winter 2018 TCICP consultant and special education teachers. Revise internal guidelines regarding planning for students with IEPs, including goal monitoring. Faculty Spring 2018 Special education teachers and administration. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Case managers will be assigned to each student with an IEP who will be responsible for outreach to families. These individuals will also be the academic coach whenever possible, thus streamlining personnel for parents to contact when they have questions. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The PTA will pay the consultant fees and the school will pay for the teachers to engage work with the consultants. Assessment and planning will occur during the school day with consultants and in co-teaching teams. Release time will be provided for teachers as needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 9  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Ongoing assessments and reflections by ICT teams will be documented in team notes monthly. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Benchmark assessments and the SLT's internal survey will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The adoption of the Danielson Framework will be in its fourth year. An implementation program has been designed to include cycles of observation, planning days, department inquiries, and PD opportunities. These cycles were designed to inform each other and build on each other. The school quality survey results indicate that faculty highly value peer and administrative feedback. However, effective school leadership will support faculty growth by scheduling observation cycles and department inquiry units aligned with department planning days to ensure observation feedback and inquiry results can be used by faculty for planning units of study on planning days. Additionally, new consultants to support instructional growth will be used to support faculty in their professional goals. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, school leaders will have created and implemented a cohesive PD, observation, and inquiry cycle that builds teacher capacity in using assessment for small group instruction, resulting in a 10% increase in teachers improving one performance level reflected in component 3d Assessment in Instruction. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Conduct Initial Planning Conferences (IPCs) with faculty and formative observations to gain key data for professional development. Faculty September and October School Leadership Complete two rounds of observations such that feedback aligns with or shapes department inquiry work for winter and spring. Faculty January and May School Leadership Align the work of all four consultants (Facing History, TCRWP, TCICP, and Math in the City) to two goals: assessment and small groups. Consultants Fall 2017 School Leadership 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the November and March family conferences, specific assessment data and instructional goals will be discussed with families. Faculty are available for questions and concerns throughout the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The PTA will pay the consultant fees and the school will pay for the teachers to engage work with the consultants. Planning will occur during the school day with consultants and in co-teaching teams. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2  By January, faculty ratings will be reviewed to determine patterns in current performance levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure for this goal will be the faculty ratings in Advance, the online rating system. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The School Leadership Team (SLT) and the PTA have made a priority of finding ways to engage families with the school and each other during their child’s middle years, grades six through eight. The Quality Review indicates that families feel as though there is a culture of respect and that their child’s progress is routinely communicated, however, after analyzing school quality data, the SLT felt that family feedback would be more impactful if our school received the data earlier in the year. In fact, an SLT survey that was first piloted in Spring 2016, showed that families, students, and faculty, were eager to share their ideas and contribute to the community. In the Spring of 2017, the SLT learned that the survey conducted needed to be formatted better for families to increase access. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, the SLT will have developed a more collaborative partnership with families resulting in a 50% increase in response rate to the internal school survey and parent workshops designed for current families once per month. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Revise the internal SLT school quality surveys. Fall 2018 SLT Families, students, and faculty Design workshops for families using the survey data from 2017. Administer the internal SLT school quality surveys. Families, students, and faculty January 2018 SLT Create an action plan using the data from the surveys SLT and PTA Winter 2018 SLT 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. n/a Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The SLT will use their allotted time and budget to revise, administer, and analyze the surveys. The faculty will support the efforts with outreach during the school day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 5  The SLT will monitor progress at the end of each of the ten meetings and revise the agenda for the next meeting accordingly. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure used to assess progress with be through the response rate on the surveys and the adherence to the time line set forth by the SLT. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher assessment and referral. State Test scores. Mathematics Science Teacher assessment and referral. State Test scores. Teacher assessment and referral. Social Studies Teacher assessment and referral. Referral from parent or school personnel. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Evidence for arguments and student-to-student discussions. Find and create Claims and Big Ideas in non-fiction writing. Fluency and math practices. Evidence for arguments and student-to-student discussions. Find and create Claims and Big Ideas in non-fiction reading and writing Evidence for arguments and student-to-student discussions. Find and create Claims and Big Ideas in non-fiction reading and writing Pragmatic Speech, At-Risk Counseling for socialization and emotional issues, Behavior plans for problematic and disruptive behaviors. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group During school Small Group During school Small Group During school Small Group During school Small Group or Individual During school 7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. x Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). x 5 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 8  Students in Temporary Housing (STH) are eligible to receive school supplies and clothing from our set-aside. If the child is involved in after school activities, the child is also eligible to receive clothing or materials related to the after-school activity. After-school tutoring or help sessions has been an option for these students as well. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Sequester Aid Title I STH for Non-Title I Schools ($133) Title I STH for Non-Title I Schools ($3059) 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. x 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). x Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. x 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). x 0  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). x 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. x 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 1  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy x x x x Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Parental Involvement and School Quality Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement School-Parent Compact (SPC) Our school, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection between school and families in order to support student achievement. School staff and families agree that this Compact outlines how families, staff, and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable students to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using school time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial, and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 3  ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting family conferences during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times for those families who are unable to attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and family programs, meetings, and other activities in a language or format that families can understand; ● involving families in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve this Compact; ● providing families with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results and other pertinent information; ● ensuring that the School-Family Compact is available to parents each year. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide families reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking families; ● notifying families of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for families to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for families during the school year, such as family conferences. Provide general support to families by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive, and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● by providing opportunities to learn about academic achievement standards and assessments as well as how to monitor their child’s progress by (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration, and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by families. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance, ensure that my child arrives to school on time, and follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by scheduling a bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits on the amount of time my child watches television, plays video games, and uses a computer for non-school purposes; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as extended-day learning opportunities, clubs, sports, and/or quality family time; ● discuss school rules and regulations with my child and require him/her to follow them; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about my child’s education by promptly reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms, and notices as requested by the school; ● participate in the development, implementation, evaluation, and revision of this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 4  ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or serve, to the extent possible, on advisory groups (e.g., School or District Leadership Teams); ● share responsibility for improving the academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people, and property; ● resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always do my best to learn 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name I.S. 289: Hudson River Middle School Borough Manhattan School Number 289 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Zeynep Ozkan Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jennie Cohen Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Cynthia Kerns Superintendent Bonnie Laboy Assistant Principal Andolyn Brown Coach School Counselor Emily Kustal Parent Parent Coordinator Sandra Leung Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Broughton Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 280 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 4 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.43% 6  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? IS 289 uses TCRWP reading and writing assessments for baselines and benchmarks. Each student's instructional plan is determined by using not only these assessments, but also by reviewing classroom assessments given by the general education, special education, and the ENL teachers. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers use conferring data gathered during push-in time and assessment results to 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? There are four levels of diagnostics at IS289: daily classroom assessments, periodic classroom assessments in reading and writing using TCWRP, ELL periodic assessments, and state assessments. As ELLs academic performance improves, we see it in 7  state test score growth as well as graduation from the NYSESLAT exam. The ENL teacher is the case manager who monitors these diagnostics. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the data is gathered, it is assessed and used to drive instruction. All ELLs have a have an individual assessment profile that includes everything from daily conference notes to periodic assessment. Levels of weakness are reinforced. For example, if a student's writing shows that they contain only simple sentences, the student will then be re-taught how to use complex sentences in their writing. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] First, there are strong classroom structures to support all learners. Curriculum based on projects and student choice provides many opportunities for students to access content in various ways. Interventions are offered for specific needs during the school day for ELA and Math. ELLs have an ELL teacher assigned to them to manage their cases and monitor growth and interventions. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. All available assessments are used, including NYSESLAT, ELA, and Math test scores. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? When test scores come out, we have staff PDs the explicit purpose of providing an opportunity to look at test scores as a faculty with a lens for how we can improve instruction for specific populations of students. For example, if a student scores low in the NYSESLAT speaking assessment, we will plan for ways to consistently include structured, academic talk in his or her academic program. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ENL program is largely push-in. On the discretion of the teacher, the students may be pulled out for additional support outside the general education classroom. The ELL students are scheduled into heterogenous classes. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The students know that the push-in teacher is the ENL teacher. Her schedule is designed each year to meet the mandates of the current ENL population. She is officially scheduled in STARS. 8  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The program uses a whole language thematic approach and teaches learning strategies and vocabulary which support ELLs in their general education classes. All four language acquisition skills—reading, writing, listening and speaking—are facilitated. ELLs read and write for authentic purposes, individually and in partnerships. The Balanced Literacy Model is incorporated in to the ENL program. Instructional strategies include read alouds, shared readings, guided reading, literature responses (oral and in writing), and written journals. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students preferred language interests are determined early in the year. To date, no student has preferred instruction or assessment in their home language. Bilingual dictionaries are available to students should they request them. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status This school has not had any SIFE students in the last 7 years and thus has not created a current separate instructional plan for these students. Student's with IEPs receive extra support from their service providers. Teachers work with students to compile word lists and to develop content area vocabulary. The focus with regard to long term ELLs is two-fold: increasing access to content specific domians as well as preparing students to pass the NYSESLAT. ELLs who need additional support may receive other services, including summer school instruction, counseling, peer tutoring, and other extended day academic services. Students who recently passed the NYSESLAT receive testing accomodations as per the state regulations. Additionally, those students are identified on class lists for teachers to facilitate small group instruction as needed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Each content area continually adds to their content specific libraries. These libraries are also being leveled throughout the year. Not only does the librarian assist in selecting appropriate books for students in English and their primary language, but classes also have libraries with leveled books. Students read a variety of genres, both fiction and non-fiction. Special emphasis is placed on supporting the literacy work—reading, writing, and speaking—of the students’ classes. Instructional materials include DVDs, CDs, magazines, and games. A project based curriculum with multi-text emphasis (video, audio, articles, trade books, children's books, and text books) ensures multiple ways of accessing content. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students are scheduled with push-in services. Small group and pull-out options are available at the teacher's descretion to support the student's academic needs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All content teachers receive training in the inclusion of strategies to support ELLs in accessing content, including visual supports. For students who score level 1 or 2 in math and ELA, we provide intervention classes during the school day. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are piloting two intervention curricula for former-ELLs using a teacher from our school who is on Sabbatical. Her research project is in the effectiveness of whole language versus grammar instruction with F-ELLs. The student who will become a long 9  term ELL next year, and takes the NYS Alternate Assessment, will be provided with more opportunitites to experiece the structure and format of the NYSESLAT. This is an effort to give her increased access to the standardized test. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There is no plan to discontinue and programs/services for ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Classes are heterogeneously grouped; there is no programming that would exclude ELLs. To the extent possible and appropriate, ENL support is provided as a push-in service. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials include differentiated written texts, visual supports, audio books, and laptops with auto-correct programs for grammar and spelling. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? With both Spanish and Chinese speaking personnel on staff, connections regarding similarities and differences between the home language and the English Language is openly discussed with classroom teachers, students, and parents. There is no additional programmatic home language supports for students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students have access to leveled texts in their heterogenous classes. It is not grade specific, but rather level specific. Teachers guide students towards appropriate materials for all students. The ENL teacher is the case manager for the ELL students and she monitors the service mandate and resource access for all ELL students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials include differentiated written texts, visual supports, audio books, and laptops with auto-correct programs for grammar and spelling. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All school information, including handbooks, supplies lists, etc., is translated and made available to newly enrolled ELL students at the beginning of the school year. There are no summer programs for new ELLs. All students new to the school attend a 'new student lunch group' to help students make a successful transition to IS 289. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All ELLs are registered for classes in Spanish language, the only foreign language taught in the school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable. 0  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teacher participates in city-wide professional development and is able to turn-key that work to the LPT and her grade teams. The ENL teacher participates in city-wide professional development and is able to turn-key that work to each grade team. Full faculty professional development is concerned with Competencies and helping increase access for all students to content area and skill based standards from the Common Core. With a focus on assessment and feedback, the faculty are gathering more information regarding the acheivement of ELL students. The Literacy coach, Mary Erenworth, has worked with ELA, Science, and Social Studies teachers regularly regarding differentiation. The entire staff work throughout the year to align reading and writing within the content areas. All teachers are scheduled for intervisitations. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Staff are provided planning time for conducting workshops for families to assist in the transition to middle school. Early identification of student needs occurs through teacher observation and assessment. Data analysis sessions supported by teams of teachers provides opportunities to work together to identify and develop plans for student intervention. Agenda's are kept for all professional development sessions and notes are kept for all team meetings. This ensures transparency as well as accountability. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? All conferences are student led and in the language preferred by the student. Tranlation is provided for either the teacher or the parent, depending on the student's preferred oral language. Translation during conferences is contracted to The Big Word. Translation during other scheduled meetings to update the family on academic progress is through the DOE over-the-phone service. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Both parents are unable to participate in school day and evening events due to their own work commitments. However, they are both very available to the school as partners in supporting their children's language and academic development. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Not applicable. 1  2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Zeynep Ozkan, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: I.S. 289 School DBN: 02M289 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Zeynep Ozkan Title Principal Andolyn Brown Assistant Principal Sandy Leung Parent Coordinator Jennie Cohen ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Emily Kustal School Counselor Bonnie Laboy Maria Broughton Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Broughton Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/28/15 10/28/15 10/28/15 10/28/15 10/28/15 10/28/15 10/28/15 10/28/15 10/28/15 10/28/15 10/28/15 10/28/15 10/28/15 10/28/15 10/28/15 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M289 School Name: I.S. 289 Superintendent: Bonnie Laboy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The primary two sources of data regarding the parent community is: 1) emergency cards request families name the language and mode of communication they prefer, and 2) the ATS report (RAPL) names the spoken and written language of each parent contact for the school. The Summary Report (RSDS) informs the school's overall planning by providing general demographic data. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 5 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Written preferences are: English, Chinese (Cantonese, Mandarin), Spanish, Russian, and Albanian. Spoken preferences are: English, Chinese (Cantonese, Mandarin), Amoy, Spanish, Japanese, Russian, and Albanian. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The student handbook requires translation each year, included is information regarding the after school program, academic resources, and a full year calendar. Each month, a curricular update is sent to all families via email and posted on our translateable website. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 6  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Family conferences occur twice a year, in fall and winter. Curriculum night occurs once per year, in September. Each grade hosts at least two "gallery walks" per year, winter and spring. All informal interactions occur by phone or email from the Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, and the teachers as needed throughout the year. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school provides each parent identified as requiring language assistance services an appropriate translated copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities. Signs in each of the covered languages indicating the availability of interpretation services are posted at the entrance to the building and outside the main school office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The SLT reviews the school quality survey yearly. Additionally, the School's SLT is designing a survey to assess the needs of the IS289 community with more regularity than the City's survey. To ensure that an informal feedback loop is 7  also a source of information for the school, the parent coordinator works frequently with F-ELL families through outreach for school based events. 8 
