2018-19 RISE SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (R-CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 01M292 School Name: ORCHARD COLLEGIATE ACADEMY Principal: MILES DOYLE 2018-19 CEP-RISE 1  Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Rise School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Partnerships Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Orchard Collegiate Academy 01M292 01M292 9-12 School Number (DBN): 220 Henry Street. NY, NY 10001 212-406-9411 212-577-0701 Phone Number: Miles Doyle Fax: mdoyle9@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): DaynaHamann Miles Doyle Ian Oswell Rosario Agathos Dan Ellis Wanda Alvarado MakaiBryan AnjaniqueHodge Geographical District: 01 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Carry Chan Superintendent: 166 Essex Street, Suite 126 cchan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-406-9417 Phone Number: 2123532945 Fax: FSC: 01 Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Yuet Chu 2018-19 CEP-RISE 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7th Avenue; New York, New York ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (917) 705-5856 Phone Number: --- Fax: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective To guide, support and accelerate the early progress demonstrated by the schools graduating out of the Renewal program, as Rising Schools of Excellence (Rise), with a compelling theory of action, clear strategy for sustainment, targeted individualized supports, continued accountability, gradual release of responsibility, such that they independently accelerate their growth trajectory. Background Rise Schools have demonstrated: ● ● they have the will and conditions in place to accelerate student growth and meet school improvement benchmarks. they have the capacity to lead/implement a school improvement strategy. Rise Schools have seen some gains1 across multiple measures including graduation rates, college readiness, state test scores and attendance. As a result, these schools will fully transition out of the Renewal Schools program at the end of the 2017-2018 SY and continue under the guidance of the Office of Field Support, in partnership with the Office of School Support and Supervision. 1All Rise Schools met at least 67% of their benchmarks, are not on the State’s Priority list, and have demonstrated a sustainable school improvement structure that will allow them to build on their progress. Six Rise Keys for Continued Improvement 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. 4. Apply a tiered approach to student intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and Improve Data Driven Practices community partners Increase monitoring and accountability 6. Theory of Action If the NYC Department of Education provides customized supports to Rise schools and principals designed around the “Six Rise School Keys for continued improvement” then, Rise principals and their teams will have the tools and resources to accelerate outcomes for ALL students and increase students’ access to an excellent and equitable education. Structure of the Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Rise school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following: ● Rise Benchmarks: please refer to the 2018-19 Rise benchmarks provided to your school. ● Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and Rise through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Rise process. ● Setting mid-year point benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan. ● Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school. ● Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 5  ● Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students. ● Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and the R-CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 6  The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the American Institute of Research (AIR) Needs Assessment, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools – they call it a Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 2018-19 CEP-RISE 7  Districts must use the new tool; and districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Education Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:  a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 8 a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC)  It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the R-CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the R-CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for R-CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Rise school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Rise Key and the corresponding statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Discuss and respond to the guiding questions under each Framework element.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Rise Program Priorities Our Rise Theory of Action (page 4) is drawn from research1 on turnaround schools, the DOE Framework for Great Schools, DTSDE Tenets, and the Quality Review, which suggest that these key priorities have the greatest impact on student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 9  RISE Keys Priorities 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. Improve Data Driven Practices 4. Apply a tiered approach to school support and intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and community partners 6. Increase monitoring and accountability  A clear focus aligned to students’ instructional needs, including college and career readiness  Access to common, standards-based curricula for all students, including ELLs and SWDs  Explicit and intentional embedding of culturally responsive Instruction in all content areas  Formative and summative assessments for all students in all grades that are aligned to curricula and produce clear evidence of learning  Tiered approach to teacher professional learning opportunities.  Partnership with families to increase engagement in students’ academic success  Implementation of a coherent vision for school improvement - a vision for leading learning, leading people, leading schools and leading change  Development of a system to support distributive leadership and build the capacity and sustainability of teacher leaders through continuous improvement  Developing leadership competencies, specific to turnaround efforts, including leveraging multiple stakeholders, a commitment to student learning and a sustained pursuit of measurable progress. Strategic allocation of resources to support instructional and professional learning plans and family engagement in leadership opportunities Integrative use of formative and summative assessment tools and practices to target resources and support throughout the year to achieve academic priorities    Ongoing analyses of school-wide and student-level data and adjustments to curricular resources and instructional moves  Prioritization of the use of standards and data to inform teaching and learning    Implementation of a tiered intervention system that engages teacher teams in frequent cycles of progress monitoring and adjustments to address diverse student needs School establishes coherent system, adopted by all to ensure that interventions are effective, differentiated and timely Increased use of teacher teams’ data-driven practices to accelerate student achievement  Clear strategy that establishes social norms within the school community and promotes a culture for learning with clear and high expectations for all students, in partnership with CBOs.  The sustainability of an environment where students feel safe, connected and engaged through practices that are culturally relevant and build their scholarly identity  The development of a whole school approach, in partnership with families, with   specific attention to social, physical and behavioral environments Social emotional learning practices embedded in teaching and learning as aligned to the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional learning (CASEL) competencies and supported by CBOs. School leaders implement effective monitoring systems to ensure that instructional practices and interventions are monitored closely at the classroom, team, and school wide level  Establish effective teacher team practices that ensure teachers are accountable for data findings and set timely and appropriate interventions  Data analysis results in adjustments to the programs and priorities to better service   students Foster positive systems for accountability driven by reflection and action planning Support from district leaders to focus efforts toward results and problem solving actions that lead to turnaround success. 1. Darden/Curry PLE – Turnaround Leadership Competencies and Turnaround Action Shown to Influence Student Achievement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 10  Achievement Network – SY 18-19 Foundations Rubric COSEBOC Standards and Promising Practices for Schools Educating Boys of Color Harvard Graduate School of Education and Harvard Business School: Certificate in School Management and Leadership Learner-Centered Initiatives Multidimensional Principal Performance Rubric Monitoring and Accountability ● Rise schools will be monitored for implementation of the Rise Comprehensive Educational Plan (R+CEP) by Superintendents and Office of Field Support. ● Rise schools will be held accountable for making progress according to annual targets set by the Department of Education, as evidenced by their attainment of named benchmark scores for each annualized key metric. Schools not achieving annual targets by June 2019 are subject to additional oversight and consequences, to be determined at a later date. ● OFS will bring increased oversight and accountability by monitoring FSC supports to schools and ensure that these are aligned with the school’s instructional focus, student and teacher needs, and moving the school toward achieving interim goals. ● OSSS will monitor DSR oversight of all supports to Rise Schools. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 11  Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the R-CEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT x x x x x x x x Name Position and Constituent Group Miles Doyle Ian Oswell Rosario Agathos Wanda Alvarado DaynaHamann MakaiBryan AngeniqueHodge Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 12 Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Daniel Ellis Jeffrey Lau RbeccaCollazo Denise Perez Hector Nunez Represented Elected UFT Elected UFT Student Contributor Elected Parent Elected Parent Elected Parent Elected UFT Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor 2018-19 CEP-RISE 13  Section 4: Rise School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Rise school addressing the following and please use existing data, where applicable: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. 2. 3. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as partners in furthering student achievement 4. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and your Rise Benchmarks and indicate where this has been a challenge. 5. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. Contextual information The needs of students and families at Orchard Collegiate Academy are many and varied. The school will serve 221 students and 90% qualify for free/reduced lunch and more than 12% of students are living in temporary housing, 15% of our student population are English Language Learners and 24% are Students with Disabilities. 97% of the student population is Black or Hispanic, traditionally underrepresented populations in colleges and universities. These students who do attend college are typically first-generation college students. The school has to provide a vast amount of additional individualized support to all our students to enable them to have the opportunity to achieve traditional, standardized and system-wide definition and measures of success.  Academic (RISE Key 1): Through our Extended Learning Time Program (Tuesdays – Fridays: 2:40 – 3:55pm), all students are programmed for credit/CCLS aligned courses from grades 9-12. Teachers refine curriculum to ensure that the variant needs of all of our students are met. All teachers are provided with weekly Professional Development on curriculum design. Students at risk have an academic intervention plan written by their teachers to ensure for parent outreach, student conferences, and extra time to meet the standards on given assignments.  Attendance (RISE Key 4,5,6): Because attendance is one of our barriers for student success, we have developed systems and structures to improve attendance using a 3 tiered team approach. The team meets once a week and is comprised of the Principal, Assistant Principal, guidance counselors, school aide and CBO Director and the Social Worker. Students considered Long Term Absences (LTA’s) are supported differently than chronic absenteeism. In terms of the LTA’s, our team devotes time each to reaching out to guardians to discuss strategies for refocusing and reengaging students to bring them back to school or to discuss possible alternative placements. The reasons for chronic absenteeism are unique to each case, so our guidance counselors and Administrative Team determine next steps on a case by case basis. This approach has provided for a 8% increase in overall attendance from 81.2% in 2015 to 89.2% in 2018. We also provide Success Mentors for students to ensure that they are connected to at least one adult in our school for guidance and support. Social Emotional (RISE Key 5,6): Over the last two years we have invested many resources into supporting the social emotional development of our students. For our high school students, Orchard Collegiate Academy) has brought with it a support staff of 2 permanent social workers, 4 social work interns and the development of a mental health clinic in our school (which serves all schools within the building). We implement College 101 - 104 elective program for our 9th and 10th graders.   Henry Street Settlement – We have partnered with Henry Street Settlement for the past three years and the priority focus has been college and career readiness (OCA Mission). We have a full time College Counselor, who works with our students to ensure that every student has an action plan for college admission, including college essay, application FAFSA form, and college acceptances. This partnership also ensures for the exposure of college life through overnight trips to colleges, as well as regular visits. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 14  Orchard Collegiate Academy is based around 3 major Educational Pillars. We believe that if students are engaged in discussion through high level, quality teacher questioning, then they will develop critical thinking and metacognitive skills that will prepare them for the conceptual learning required for career and college pathways. Beliefs about learning Pillar 1. Academic Intervention Purpose: To provide students in need with the supports necessary to meet our high expectations and become college ready. In order to achieve this goal, we provide: ∙ Training for all teachers in how to read IEPs and use them to improve instruction ∙ Quarterly analysis of student progress – specifically tracking growth and progress ∙ 9th Period for students who have credit deficiencies and need extra Regents Prep, Saturday Regents Academy ∙ PD on differentiation by product, process and content ∙ Implementation of frequent, formative classroom assessment ∙ Assess student reading and vocabulary levels and provide modifications to help students read and comprehend texts at grade level text complexity ∙ College Counseling with College and Guidance Counselors for off-track 11th and 12th graders Instructional Focus ∙ Teachers will frequently check for understanding and adjust lessons based on student understanding Pillar 2. College Readiness Purpose: To provide students with challenging curriculum that requires critical thinking and analysis at a college level ∙ A department created college readiness goal that is tracked throughout the school year 2018-19 CEP-RISE 15  ∙ Common Core aligned Curriculum Map and unit plans for every course ∙ Weekly department meetings to discuss and refine curriculum, analyze student work and create common interim assessments ∙ Refinement of vertically and Common Core aligned skill sequences ∙ Research papers, Research in Gov’t Class ∙ College Counseling for 10-12 graders ∙ College trips and college fairs for all grade levels ∙ Resources: Depths of Knowledge, UDL, Danielson Framework, Orchard Collegiate Academy Instructional Handbook Instructional Focus ∙ Provide students with opportunities to participate in “productive struggle.” ∙ Insist that students use evidence to make claims through whole class discussion and/or writing Pillar 3.Data Driven Instruction (Rise Key 3) Purpose: To closely examine student mastery of content and to use data to create targeted lessons that specifically address student deficiencies Goal: Using the inquiry process, 100% of teachers will implement data driven instruction plan and use data to guide their instruction ∙ Creation and implementation of quarterly interim assessments ∙ One-on-one data analysis meetings with admin after each interim assessment ∙ 2-3 day corrective teaching periods after each interim assessment ∙ Follow up data meetings to review data from retaught standards ∙ Training in Scantron/Excel Sheets with Data Coordinator ∙ Students provided with Student Proficiency Sheets after each interim assessment ∙ Students track own progress and set goals 2018-19 CEP-RISE 16 ∙ Targeted review and tutoring sessions based on data analysis ∙ Mock Regents Spring From these 3 big pillars we as a community will be concentrating on 3 Priority Areas that align to our District and RISE school initiative. Priority A: Engage in Inclusive Practices that Focus on Equity in our Diverse Community of Learners (RISE Key 5) Expectation 1 - Engage stakeholders in conversations and action planning around culturally responsive education and inclusive practices Priority B: Strengthen Teaching and Learning through District 1 Principles for Learner Agency (Rise Key 1, 5) Expectation 1. - Create conditions to implement District 1’s principles for Learning Agency  School-wide instructional supports for ELLs and SPEDs Priority C: Increase Collaboration and Coherence across District 1 Schools (Rise Key 5) Expectation 4. - Partnership with private and community based organizations to provide high quality learning experiences for our students that aid them towards college and career (Pillar 2)  Class trips (fieldwork) are embedded in the curriculum 2018-19 CEP-RISE 17  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 01M292 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 171 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 8 9 4 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 9 7 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 88.9% % Reduced Lunch 13.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.2% 56.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.16 0% 33% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 72% 64% 66.7% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Yes N/A 85 76 88.6% 2.3% 24.6% 25.1% 11.1% 2.3% 2 57% 5.5 N/A N/A 70% 70% 72.1% 3% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP-RISE 18  2018-19 CEP-RISE 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. (aligned to Rise Keys 2 and 6) Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. (aligned to Rise Key 3) The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. (aligned to Rise Keys 1 and 4) Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? The Orchard Collegiate Academy uses CCLS aligned EngageNY curricula in ELA and mathematics. Through the inquiry process, teachers continue to adjust the curriculum and lessons to address the needs of all students. However, based on feedback from our Quality Review and from Regents results and that 24% of students have IEPs and the school’s four year graduation rate is 15% lower than the NYC average, in addition to our efforts to re-engage students in learning, the Orchard Collegiate Academy, we recognize the need to consistently assess student progress and needs as well as to create learning opportunities for students in which they can take ownership of their own learning. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? 1. What curricula will be implemented? How will it be scaffolded for all students? What academic programs (CTE, AP, etc.) will be implemented? How will the instructional shifts be evident? EngageNY, New Visions and the soon to be published Social Studies "Passport" curricula will be the basis for the curriculum design at Orchard Collegiate Academy to ensure that the school's curricula are CCLS aligned. Based on the school's 3 Big Pillars, we will continue to work on the aligned instructional foci: 3D - checking for understanding and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 20  adjusting lessons/curriculum based on student assessment data; students using evidence to make claims based on high yield discussion strategies and in writing; using close reading strategies to improve student performance. ● High School: Engage NY for all Core Subject areas in the High School As we work with our school improvement partners, Cambridge Education , we will provide more job-embedded planning so that teachers can plan for what they learned in Professional Development. In particular the need to support and coach teacher teams, to engage in a focused process for revising curriculum maps to ensure that they are more closely aligned with CCSS through a backwards-planning process Understanding By Design and how teaches can effectively utilize protocols and other professional tools when planning and implementing effective instructional strategies, such as engagement strategies, questioning techniques, and the use of assessment data to revise CCSS aligned curricula, incorporate effective, high-leverage instructional strategies and learning experiences, and design targeted formative assessments to positively impact student learning and achievement. Our most recent QR 2017 revealed that we need to focus on cohesiveness and pedagogy in each core subject. Cambridge professional learning support will be focusing on this alignment with all departments by providing one-on-one, whole department, and individual team support. The Principal and his Instructional Leadership Team will continue to lead all departments in inquiry based Data Driven Instruction (DDI) cycles. and hone our corrective teaching pedagogy. Additionally, teacher teams will meet weekly in departments engaging in cycles of inquiry around set Department Expectations that are aligned to the Orchard Collegiate Academy's “3 Big Pillars”. Departmental Expectations: 1. Create a department wide college readiness goal and use student work to monitor student progress toward that goal throughout the year. Provide quarterly report on department’s progress toward goal. 2. Create and revise common quarterly interim assessments and create interim assessment calendar 3. Analyze data from quarterly assessments and plan/implement re-teaching plans 4. Schedule and facilitate departmental inter-visitations and feedback sessions 5. Create and revise Common Core aligned unit plans that are both rigorous and accessible for all students. 6. Monitor and revise vertically aligned skills sequences aligned to the Common Core Standards 7. Share best practices and instructional strategies 8. Department Leader observes every teacher in department Department team work will ensure alignment to state assessments by the development and implementation of formative and summative assessments that utilize State released items. Furthermore, we will continue to provide ongoing job-embedded PD for teacher teams in designing effective lesson plans aligned to the 4 keys of engagement. Our CBO, Henry Street Settlement plans to offer the following AIDP activities: Academic Advisement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 21  HSS will continue developing and bolstering the curriculum for the Advisory Program, with the collaboration from our Advisors, Partnership with Henry Street Settlement and the Leadership Program. HSS staff will specifically provide one-on-one academic advisement and utilize progress reports as an opportunity to target struggling students, including those who are not on pace to be promoted. HSS will schedule interventions, including possible home visits and parent meetings, where promotion requirements will be discussed and plans for student to improve academic standing will be implemented. Counseling: HSS will provide weekly individual and group counseling to students based on academic standing, previous chronic absenteeism, recent attendance struggles, referral, and/or walk-in availability. HSS will inform students and families of community partners and resources during the program’s kickoff events, provide resources during family assessments, conduct formal workshops and presentations, and also conduct informational tabling during school-wide events such as parent-teacher conferences. In addition, HSS staff will work closely with Partnership with Children, an organization that will provide OCA with an additional social worker and several interns for individual and family counseling, crisis intervention, behavior management, and much more. Family Involvement HSS will conduct family assessments and home visits for parents of high-risk youth. HSS will partner closely with Parent Coordinators to formulate the best strategy for parent engagement. Parent workshops facilitated by HSS and/or partner organizations and will focus on topics relevant to the high school population, such as college access, Common Core in the high school curriculum, Regents and SAT preparation, as well as violence/drug abuse, STD, and pregnancy prevention. HSS will also use parent-teacher conferences and other school events as opportunities to engage with parents. HSS will partner with the School Leadership Team to facilitate meetings, mailings, “robocalls,” mass texts, flyers, and emails to remind families and students about school events and policies. Incentives OCA attendance improvement programming incorporates innovative short-term individual incentives and long-term group incentives. For example, on a biweekly basis, students who meet attendance criteria are awarded with gift cards or movie tickets; on a monthly basis, students who meet targeted attendance minimums are eligible to participate in a field trip (bowling, ice skating, etc.). At the end of each semester and school year, the top 3-5 students who demonstrate the greatest improvement in attendance/academics, and/or achieve the best overall attendance and grades receive larger incentives/awards The impact we expect to see next year is that teachers will be able to: • focus and align curriculum around essential standards; • diagnose learning patterns in students; • develop exemplary lessons that are shared across the school; • improve lesson design and assessment design skills; • use planning time effectively and efficiently; • build a culture of collaboration at the school. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 22  • promote greater engagement of students 2. What rigorous learning experiences will students engage in through Expanded Learning Time? As a Rise school we fully embrace the fact that when used well, more learning time can lead to higher achievement, better attendance, and healthier attitude and habits that put students on the path for success. Therefore, we are totally committed to providing all students an opportunity to receive at least one hour of additional learning time, every day, commencing in the 2018-2019 school year. We will incorporate supplemental academic opportunities ( Monday through Thursday ), including academic interventions, (AIS) such as Think Through Math and REWARDS Reading for identified students, while the Friday Renewal hour will focus on enrichment activities. The high school program will be credit bearing, except for Regents review and AIS components. In implementing the Community School model in collaboration with OCA, HSS would leverage decades of experience as a premier afterschool provider to integrate diverse expanded learning/enrichment activities that meet the needs of middle/high school and over-age/under-credited students. Activities would be tailored to the needs, characteristics, and feedback of Orchard Collegiate Academy's student body and leadership, and respond to the fact that 21% of students have IEPs and the school’s four year graduation rate is 15% lower than the NYC average. Activities would be strategically linked to school-day academics in order to reinforce student learning and academic achievement. HSS would also align all activities with the vision/priorities of OCA’s principal, SLT, students/parents, and School Renewal/CS Plans. HSS recommends a range of expanded learning/enrichment activities. 3. What will the pedagogical practice look like? What will the mode of instruction be? What will classes look like? Growing from our work during the 2017-18 school year, further supports in the areas of complex texts, fluency and evidence-based claims will be provided to all teaching staff through a PD and coaching focus on Writing Strategies (Judith Hochman). Now that teachers are able to identify and provide complex texts, the next phase of the work will include regular and consistent use of complex texts and refinement of instructional strategies. SIG partners, Cambridge Education and the Instructional Leadership Team will support teachers, through individual coaching cycles, in this area, with additional support from assistant principal, and principal. The Instructional Leadership Team will develop and agree upon a systematic process for reviewing the effectiveness of lesson planning and the infusion of the instructional shifts into all academic subjects using the inquiry based Data Driven Instruction (DDI cycles) as the center of our PD/work. This will involve not only maintaining our frequent cycles of observation to ensure that what teachers say they are planning, is occurring in their classrooms, but also continued coordination of partners to ensure teachers’ planning is effective in differentiating instruction and increasing the use of technology as both a teaching and learning tool. The impact we expect to see next year is:  ● More effective collaboration by all teacher teams during Common Planning Time  ● Improved lesson planning, which includes appropriate strategies and interventions differentiated for individual students, student subgroups, or any other combination advance Improved practices to check for student understanding and use those data to modify and adjust instruction   ● The infusion of all instructional shifts into all academic subjects as evidenced by lesson observations by administrators 2018-19 CEP-RISE 23  ● Inter-visitations used to effectively share practices across classrooms led by the Instructional Leadership Team  Improvement in Student Led Conference Performance Tasks 4. How do the teachers use multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? All content area teachers engage students in strategies for finding and citing evidence from sources to support their claims. Mathematics classes engage students in persevering through challenging, multi-step problems with real-world context. Literacy teachers work collaboratively to ensure students engaged with complex texts and planned for multiple strategies for accessing information from complex texts. As a result, the impact we have seen is the emergence in a number of classrooms of more effective: ● Matching just-right books and student reading levels with their independent reading books. ● Creating multiple entry points into utilizing key reading strategies to enhance comprehension of complex texts. ● Tracking of understanding through the completion of graphic organizers to show understanding. ● Strategies for facilitating text-based discussions. ● Intentional use of Probing questions for developing critical thinking. ● use of multi-step problems with real-world context ● student engagement with complex texts; and ● multiple strategies for accessing information from complex texts. ● engaged with more non-fiction texts than ever before. ● improvement in academic vocabulary, evidenced in observations ● Engaged in more discussion in which they reference a broader range of texts more readily, evidenced in student work and classroom observations. Teacher teams meet three times a month and engage in cycles of inquiry while looking together at samples of student work and teacher work that will enable them to better make decisions about individual learners, thus creating multiple entry points for all learners. 5. How will consistency be supported across school faculty and community educators and across a longer learning day? The School Instructional Leadership Team includes the CBO Director who sits alongside the Principal, Assistant Principals, Department Chairs, Grade team leaders and Counselors. This team will be responsible for ensuring consistency and alignment across the school faculty and community educators and across a longer learning day. In addition the CBO Director will attend all Professional Development training provided for the school faculty, and whenever feasible relevant community educators will also be invited to attend. When this is not possible the CBO Director will be responsible for cascading the training to the community educators. The ultimate vision for the school is that the school staff and community educators will become integrated into one coherent faculty. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 24  6. What will the assessments be? How will the data be collected and used? Who will analyze it and see that next steps are taken pedagogically and with regard to curricular revisions? In addition to using a range of external assessments, departments will institute Data Driven Instruction cycles to track student progress. We will ensure our assessment cycles are such that, with greater alignment between curriculum and assessment as mentioned above, that all teacher teams are using data more effectively to plan lessons that address the needs of individual students and sub-groups to promote students’ academic and social achievement. Additionally, we will ensure our assessment cycles are such that, with greater alignment between curriculum and assessment as mentioned above, that all teacher teams are using data more effectively to plan lessons that address the needs of individual students and sub-groups to promote students’ academic and social achievement. 7. What percentage of students do you expect will show measurable growth in ELA and Math by year 2? (Elementary and Middle Schools) N/A 8. What percentage of students do you expect will be at college readiness in English and Math by year two? (High Schools) In 2013-14, our 4-year College Readiness Index indicates that 6.6% of students were College and Career Ready. In 2014-15, the rate increased to 11.1%. The 6-year College Readiness Index increased from 31.0% in 2013-14 to 33.7 in 2014-15. In 2015-16, it was 35%. We anticipate that the 4 year College Readiness Index will be 15% of students by June 2019. 9. What graduation rate do you aspire to achieve by year two? (High Schools) We expect that the graduation rate will increase to 85% by 2019. (That is a growth of 20% over 2 years) How will you implement a standards-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, including ELLs and SWDs? Our vision involves the teachers and staff working collaboratively to adjust the curriculum based on data driven inquiry that focuses on rigor and includes supports and scaffolds for ELLs and students with disabilities. We also believe and expect that the instructional tasks will engaging and relevant to students and structured so that students are not only engaged but accept ownership for their own learning. What is your vision for ensuring that all student have access to rigorous coursework that moves them towards career and college readiness? How will you support the personal and academic skills, habits, and behaviors needed for students to be career and college ready? The new focus of the Orchard Collegiate Academy is based on providing a college readiness program for all students. Within our general program, we have included college 101 to 104 electives that prepare students for both the PSAT AND SAT as well as supporting students in identifying college choices and completing applications. We have College Now programs in collaboration with CUNY. In additions, we have created a "College Access for ALL" team to ensure that academic rigor, social considerations for college are incorporated into all subject courses schoolwide. This year, the 2018-19 CEP-RISE 25  team is preparing curriculum to ensure that all students participate in a graduation pathway conference that will be student led. How do you envision embedding the elements of culturally responsive instruction and how will you know that implementation is successful? Emphasis will be on student centered instruction through a rigorous curriculum. Teachers will ensure that the needs of all students are assessed and that instruction is differentiated to meet their specific needs. Practices, such as World Cafés will support students to synthesize their ideas, organize them and express them through structured discourse. Writing will be included in all tasks in all subjects . Students will engage in goal setting and will consistently receive actionable feedback for improvement so that they will take ownership of their progress and understand their next steps for learning. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Based on assessed student needs, we expect that the teachers provide structures in each lesson to support students at their level in order to ensure that all students can effectively access the curriculum. This includes purposeful and flexible grouping as well as language and organizational scaffold for ELLs and other students. How do you envision differentiating teacher professional learning opportunities to support instructional foci, meet students’ unique needs and advance culturally responsive education in your school? Utilizing our partnerships with the Achievement Network we will be able to offer individual PD strands for specific teachers and their areas of instructional improvement. We will also continue to use coaches from the MFSC and Cambridge to address the needs of departmental teams. Our Peer Collaborative Teachers will mentor the new teachers in the 2018-2019 academic year (Rise Key 2). Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, 85% of students in Grade 11 will increase their performance on the written essay and text-analysis response to be College Ready (Rise Benchmark 2019 - Graduation Progress for 10th and 11th Grade) Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve 4 Year Graduation Rate X 2018-19 CEP-RISE 26 6 Year Graduation Rate X Regents Completion Rate X 2018-19 CEP-RISE 27  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers will receive training in Writing strategies to support students’ ability to understand and improve their writing conventions ELA department All All teachers Principal Cambridge Coaches DSR How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Instructional Leadership Walkthroughs Teachers across content areas will increase the rigor of the tasks they Fall 2018 (School Year 18-19 PD fortnightly) Assistant Principal Peer Collaborative Teacher Collection of Student work from all grades Student Led Conferences Writing Strategy Lead Teacher All All teachers Cambridge Coaches Coaching Advance evaluations 3b Fall 2018 (August 22-30th - Curriculum Institute - 2 Inquiry 2018-19 CEP-RISE 28  implement with their students by continuing to develop our writing rubrics by department and requiring students to explain in writing the processes they used in completing assignments and what their decisions were based on. Students will use writing rubrics to self and peer assess their work Students will lead portfolio presentations at parent conferences and identified department meetings to explain and justify their thinking Teachers will include rubric data as formative assessments in common planning meetings to identify areas of need and of instructional focus and will adjust their unit and lesson plans accordingly. Teachers will also include a written essay and text analysis response on quarterly interim assessments CBO All School Guidance all teachers Cycles per Semester) Science Educational Consultant ILT walkthroughs Article Collection Analysis and Feedback Increased numbers of students able to lead parent conferences Principal Assistant Principal December 1st-15th Principal CBO director Cambridge Coaches April 15th - 25th Instructional Leadership Team Peer Collaborative Teachers All teachers All Fall 2018 Principal Documentation of changes/ adjustments to curriculum June 2019 Cambridge Coaches Ongoing through the academic year Data Coordinator 2018-19 CEP-RISE 29  4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents/Guardians will be invited to our schools Forums to assess the OCA's instructional and student progress (2017-2018). Parents/Guardians will attend Student Led Conferences and Graduation Pathway meetings to assess their child's academic achievement and College Readiness Progress. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Teachers will attend professional development during the school day and a budget line will be created to pay for a long term substitute to cover teachers attending PD or working with a coach. Cambridge will support the teachers both in-class and in team meetings for other activities. Funds for Cambridge have already been scheduled. The budget will be adjusted to provide both substitute and per session funds. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, students will demonstrate an increase in writing proficiency by a minimum .5 (8.5%) rubric levels as measured on the 2nd Quarterly Interim Assessment (Rise Key 3). Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 30  Students will take writing assessments using Regents quality writing rubrics as the assessment measure. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. (aligned to Rise Key 5) 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. (aligned to Rise Key 5) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed x x 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Attendance has been the focus for our newly risen RISE School. The attendance benchmark for Orchard Collegiate Academy was 87.6% and our 2018 YTD attendance was 88.2%, below the school's benchmark. As a result, increasing attendance will be an area of focus for Orchard Collegiate Academy in the 2018-19 school year. (Rise Key 5) Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you, in partnership with each CBO and families, enact your vision? Our vision will be seen as truly embracing the community school ethos by actively meeting the needs of the community, which it serves; so that it is seen as “A school in the community and a community in the school”. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 32  Therefore, we would wish the school stakeholders to describe the school as a warm and nurturing place which provides high quality education and support for students, young people and adults to enable them to develop critical thinking and acquire the skills that will prepare them for the conceptual learning required for career and college pathways and to become lifelong learners and active participants in society. which will result in a consistently higher rate of attendance by students who are eager to come to school and families who are prepared to support their children. In the coming year our Guidance Counselors will continue to facilitate the grade level meetings and work with Teachers to develop action plans and strategies to improve student attendance, increase academic outcomes, and address student’s social/emotional needs based on a range of data. The focus on attendance and outreach will continue. We also envision that the CBO will provide additional support and guidance to widen the avenues for student voice beyond the current School council. We firmly believe that the CBO partnership will develop over time into a truly integrated and mutually supportive partnership, where the school staff and the CBO staff become a unite faculty serving the needs of the local community. In relation to sustaining and supporting the social and emotional growth and health of the students, we initially see that this will be through targeted interventions such as attendance initiatives, workshops, 1: 1 counselling and support groups. We recognize the need to, as a whole school, better address students’ social and emotional needs and personal development. As such, we plan to utilize the highly recommended services of HSS to embed a Social worker within the day to day life of the school. In addition to holding 1:1 and a group sessions the Social Worker will also support and work with advisers to provide turnkey strategies to advisors for lessons and provide advice and support to individual teachers. As such, we plan to utilize the highly recommended services of HSS to embed a Social worker within the day to day life of the school. In addition to holding 1:1 and group sessions, the Social Worker will also support and work with advisers to provide turnkey strategies to advisors for lessons and provide advice and support to individual teachers. HSS social workers will provide a range of direct support services to students (and their families) ranging from individual counseling, crisis intervention, attendance outreach, activities to support students’ social and emotional development, family engagement opportunities, and support and training for staff. As a Community school, we will be collaborating with our CBO to work with us to strengthen our family and community ties, by coordinating our outreach services and structures of support across the two organizations. Our vision is to fully develop the an on-site, fully integrated School-based Mental Health Clinic (SBMHC) at Orchard Collegiate HS that was established last year, with services to be delivered by an experienced and culturally sensitive LCSW and MSW staff. They will include a wide range of appropriate interventions and resources for students, parents, and the school staff. The mental health clinic staff will work directly with the school team and the principal and Coordinator to assess and determine specific school (universal interventions) and classroom‐level and small group 2018-19 CEP-RISE 33  behavioral health interventions towards mental health (MH) awareness and connecting youth to services to improve the school climate. As a result of the collaborative efforts the impact we expect to see next year is: We will continue to increase our attendance rates by utilizing the members of our attendance team to review daily attendance, reach out to parents/guardians, alert ACS when necessary and implement new incentives and school-wide celebrations for increased attendance. We will continue to see an increase in parent and student conferences through the use of use Jupiter Grades we will see more parent active engagement in supporting students attendance. Describe your plan to implement a culture of trust and high expectations for teachers, students, families and community partners. Our community will continue to center upon our Core Values. Through Our Community School Team, which comprises of all stakeholders, we will initiate more events and opportunities for parents to view and assess the instruction and achievement of our school. In addition we will continue to grow the SLT and PTA. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? To provide on-site and outreach mental health services to students and families. CBO Focus To provide on-site counseling and socio-emotional support CBO Partner HSS Mental Health Services Henry Street Settlement How will you, in partnership with your CBO, create a supportive and engaging environment for your students’ families? The SBMHC will significantly enhance resource development for mental health services and meet these Community School goals: •Offer mental health services to all students who need them. The SBMHC will have an appropriate number of experienced MH staff embedded within Orchard Collegiate HS. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 34  •Increase access to universal, selective, and targeted mental health services, including clinical treatments using evidence‐based models and practices. All MH services will use evidence-based models. Our school-wide services such as workshops and staff trainings listed below, will deliver universal interventions. Selective interventions, including early or preventive interventions will take place through group work. Targeted services will be offered on a short-term or long-term basis. Interventions may include one or a combination of behavioral modification, trauma- focused cognitive behavioral therapy, crisis intervention, and/or medication management, home visits and referrals, among others. • Educate teachers, students, and parents about mental health issues and practices. Our SBMHC will positively affect the culture of the school/enhance programming by providing resources such as workshops and professional development, on topics per the needs assessment. Student workshops will cover relevant topics like self-care or conflict resolution. Staff will receive education about mental health issues, early detection and prevention, education and classroom support, among others. Parent offerings may include topics like decreasing stress around test-taking and recognizing signs of common mental health disorders in adolescents/effective treatment options. •Decrease stigma around mental health in the school community. We will hold events like a Mental Health Awareness Month to de-stigmatize mental health treatment and show what types of modalities and treatment we are using. Leverage opportunities within the school and the community to provide needed services to students and parents. We will collaborate with school services to maximize our impact. Within the community, our nearby Article 31 clinic has an on staff psychiatrist. Our Health Navigators can help uninsured families enroll in health insurance plans. What essential questions, or key themes, will be explored by all staff and students that acknowledge and celebrate the culture and heritage of the student body? How do we achieve "access for all" and make sure we are a culturally responsive learning community? What evidence will you use to gauge the impact of your plan to create a positive school environment? We will collect feedback form student, parent and teacher surveys distributed at regular intervals during the academic year. In addition we are part of a Learning Partnership Program that has a focus on enhancing the "partnership schools" ability to look at our community through an equity lens. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 35  By June 2019 , student attendance will increase to a 91% as measured by daily attendance records and ATS reports Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Attendance Progress towards graduation - Years 10th and 11th Grade (Rise Benchmark) --- 2018-19 CEP-RISE 36 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Counselors Attendance Teachers HSS Staff September 2018 to June 2019 Principal ; Counselors CBO Attendance Fall 2019 Principal CBO Director How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Logs of outreach efforts and results; increase in attendance for those students Logs of Success Mentor interactions; increase in attendance for those students CBO Attendance Principal CBO Director Increase in attendance Intro Ongoing through the academic year Attendance Team weekly Meetings Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Continue weekly attendance team meetings with school leadership, teachers and CBO create plan for student outreach that includes counseling for parents and students who are chronically absent Student Success mentors will be assigned to chronically absent students Create incentive program in school to increase attendance. Develop home visit action plan using CBO and school social workers to support families in need Begin local recruitment efforts (in district and borough middle schools) to attract students living closer to the school, including the Advisors CBO HSS Principal AP Attendance November 2018 -Middle School Tours Principal CBO Director Students living closer to school select Orchard Collegiate Academy for high school (creation of 2018-19 CEP-RISE 37  scheduling of open houses for prospective parents, students and MS guidance counselors bi-weekly 4b – Parent and Family Engagement the admissions rubric) How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. During the academic year (2018-2019) key events will inform parents about the support and community vision of Orchard Collegiate Academy. (Family Night September 28th...Student Led Conferences December 15th...Student Led Conferences April 26th...Forum May 24th). In addition we will hold monthly Community School team Meetings , PTA , SLT and schedule parent/guardian meetings on an ad hoc basis. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. For attendance outreach and additional support for chronically absent students and their families, the following will be needed: Counselors, Henry Street Settlement, Leadership Program, Professional Development Materials, Americorp Parent outreach personnel Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School X Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019 student attendance will improve by a minimum of 2.5% as measured by daily attendance records and ATS reports Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Daily attendance records and ATS reports. New Visions OCA Heat Map 2018-19 CEP-RISE 38  Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 39  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. (aligned to Rise Key 2) 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). (aligned to Rise Key 3) x x X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Based on feedback from the 2016-17 Quality Review , we understood that additional work needed to be done around the development of rigorous, CCLS aligned rubrics and providing consistent actionable feedback to students. There were also additional discussions around the need for curriculum adjustments as a result of analyzing assessment data. Orchard Collegiate Academy has scheduled dedicated time for teacher team inquiry meetings which will use specific DDI/inquiry protocols to both analyze assessment data and student work and collaborate on curriculum modifications needed. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? We have organized a wide range scheduled activities which actively promote teacher inquiry and collaboration. For example, all teachers have dedicated time for teacher teams to work together during Common Planning Time (CPT). Content teams meet 2 times per week for 45 minutes. During this time, teachers have engaged in collaborative planning based on assessment data (teacher assessments and state assessments), which allows them to plan according to the identified needs of the students they teach. Teachers work to improve their lesson plans with protocols (Collaborative Inquiry Protocol) to ensure structure and timeliness of their meetings, and they also review student work to ensure that all students receive feedback on what they need to do to improve the quality of their work and that appropriate interventions are integrated into subsequent lesson plans. Teachers also meet as grade teams with a specific focus on 2018-19 CEP-RISE 40  tracking cohort data, devising action plans for support that includes, student conferencing, advisory planning, after-school tutoring, parent outreach/meetings. They are teacher and CBO led meetings. We believe that if students are engaged in discussion through high level, quality teacher questioning, then they will develop critical thinking and metacognitive skills that will prepare them for the conceptual learning required for career and college pathways. Orchard Collegiate Academy Instructional Collaborative Vision has “3 Big Pillars”: How do you envision enhancing collaboration amongst your Instructional Leadership Team to improve teacher practices and student learning? The Instructional Leadership Team at Orchard Street Academy will meet regularly to engage in the same inquiry process required by each teacher team. During these meetings, data will be examined and analyzed and teacher/student/ class needs will be determined in order to determine next steps for support and to school program revision. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? At Orchard Collegiate Academy, teacher teams utilize a data driven inquiry process that looks at assessment results and student work to adjust the curriculum and lessons to meet their needs as well as to create corrective action plans to ensure that students reach proficiency in the subject content and our school wide Power Targets. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve data driven teacher practices that result in improvement in student achievement? What data will teachers and the Instructional Leadership Team regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon needed adjustments to teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? Data Reviewed Diagnostic & Formative Assessments Student Work To assess student needs and monitor student progress in each core content area Intent Using uniform CCLS based rubrics, teachers will analyze student writing and other work products to determine progress and next steps for instruction Curriculum and lesson plans The team will examine the curriculum regularly to ensure that appropriate adjustments are made and lesson plans will be monitored to determine consistency across classroom and fidelity to instructional areas of focus. Describe the screening process you use to identify students who need extra help? How do you use this process to determine which intervention to provide? Students that need different tiers of intervention are discussed at grade team, PPT and during Instructional Specialist Support Meetings. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 41  Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, all teachers will utilize formative assessment data including interim assessments and rubric data to inform curriculum adjustments as measured by revisions planned in a 100% of the Corrective Instruction Action Plans and a minimum of 15% increase in student proficiency on formative assessments. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal? 4 year graduation rate 6 year graduation rate Regents Completion Rate --- 2018-19 CEP-RISE 42  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Cambridge coaches will work closely with the core departments on developing formative and summative assessments Teachers will meet weekly using inquiry protocols to identify problems of practice using relevant data and create plans for corrective instruction Teachers will regularly review student progress with the students to ensure student goal setting. These will be articulated at student led conferences Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers 4 and 6 Year Graduation Rate CBO Director September 2018 to June 2019 Ongoing Principal CE All teachers 4 and 6 year graduation rates CBO Director September 2018 to June 2019 Principal CE Weekly All teachers 4 and 6 year graduation rates September 2018 to June 2019 Principal AP Quarterly How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Collection and analysis of formative assessment data for increase in student content mastery Increased numbers of students attaining content mastery on formative and summative assessments Increasing numbers of students able to lead parent conferences and articulate their accomplishments 2018-19 CEP-RISE 43  Teachers will use formative and interim assessment data to create flexible instructional groups for instruction Principal, APs, Counselors, CBO Director Attendance coordinator 4b – Parent and Family Engagement 4 and 6 year graduation rates September 2018 to June 2019 Principal CBO Director Counselor Ongoing and learning goals Increase in number of teachers receiving effective ratings in 3b and 3c on observations How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the academic year (2018-2019) key events will inform parents about the work being achieved by our teacher teams (Collaborative Teacher Meetings) of Orchard Collegiate Academy. (Family Night September 28th...Student Led Conferences December 15th...Student Led Conferences April 26th...Forum May 24th). In addition we will hold monthly Community School Team Meetings , PTA , SLT and schedule parent/guardian meetings on an ad hoc basis to inform our parents and guardians about student achievement. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Professional Learning materials (copies, supplies); per session for teachers; Principal, Assistant Principal, Curriculum Instructional Leads, Renewal Team, Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, ELL and SETSS Teachers Curriculum Resources ( Engage NY, ) Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School X Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, 2 Corrective Instruction Plans submitted by all teachers will include revised instructional strategies and student groupings based on formative assessment data resulting in a minimum of 8% increase in student proficiency on interim assessments. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Interim Assessments in all content areas 2018-19 CEP-RISE 44  Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 45  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). (aligned with Rise Key 2) Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. (aligned with Rise Key 6) 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. (aligned with Rise Key 1) 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). (aligned with Rise Keys 4 and 5) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: X SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Based on observation data from 2017-18 and the feedback from the Quality Review process, it is clear that the majority of teachers were not effectively checking for understanding during instruction in order to adjust their lessons to meet the needs of all students. As a result, approximately 40% of students did not pass Regents examinations. As a result, Orchard Collegiate Academy will focus on creating and implementing quality assessments, including daily checking for understanding , to ensure that teachers are receiving accurate feedback and data on student understanding and content mastery so that they can adjust the curriculum and daily lesson plans to ensure that all students are engaged and are able to attain standards mastery. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 46  How will school leader articulate a shared vision and mission to the entire school community? As previously indicated the primary goal for Orchard Collegiate Academy over the next several years will be to continue to improve the culture of the school for students, families and staff so that we actively engage all stakeholders in the school improvement process to drive our core values and the vision of student ownership and achievement. Therefore, the school leader is committed to actively involving all stakeholders in articulating and continually reviewing and revising the shared vision to ensure that it is fully embraced by the whole community. In addition to ensuing that each stakeholder group is represented on the School Community Team and key committees and working parties this will also include actively promoting the vision and mission using a wide range of multi-media approaches including: school notice boards, hallways displays, school website, parent and community newsletter, tweets, student and parent portal, staff and student handbook. How will the Principal ensure the CBO partnership is strong? The CBO will continue to be an active partner in the development of the Renewal school initiative and the implementation of the Community School opportunities. The CBO director will be a full and active member of the School Cabinet and will be a full partner in all aspects of our academic program, working together to plan to meet all of our needs, including our most urgent needs, short term interventions, and long term solutions. We firmly believe that the CBO partnership will continue to develop over time into an even stronger, truly integrated and mutually supportive partnership, where the school staff and the CBO staff become a united faculty serving the needs of the local community. In relation to sustaining and supporting the social and emotional growth and health of the students we initially see that this will be through targeted interventions such as attendance initiatives, workshops, 1: 1 counselling as a means to provide extensive social and emotional supports. We recognize the need to, as a whole school, better address students’ social and emotional needs and personal development. What are your core belief(s) for school improvement and how they inform your vision for developing instructional leadership at your school? I will continue to develop my ability to create and refine the systems and structures needed to monitor progress in non-academic areas. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? We believe that teacher leadership is key to creating conditions for staff and student ownership of our work and our learning. We will continue to include teacher leaders in our instructional cabinet and will rely on the teacher leaders to facilitate teacher team meetings. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 47  Our School Leadership Team plays an important part in ensuring that both staff and parents are fully represented and have a voice in our program design and implementation practices. We also have a strong Student Government through which student voice can be heard and incorporated into decisions made about all aspects of school functioning. How will you use evidence-based systems to ensure school and teacher leaders are led by a cycle of continuous learning and use this to inform their teams’ priorities? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Using an inquiry process, the school instructional cabinet will examine: 1. assessment data to monitor the effectiveness of instruction and to modify and adjust professional learning efforts and programming for students; 1. rubric data, test data, student work CBO director; guidance counselors; social workers; success mentors 2. attendance related data to determine next steps for outreach and support for students in-school; 2. New Visions data sorter and heat map; ATS data; success mentor reports; advisory logs 3. IEP data to monitor and adjust curriculum and instruction implementation --- Part 3 – Annual Goal 3. IEPs; PPC notes and recommendations; --- ---- Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, 80% of teachers will be rated as effective or higher on component 3b of the Danielson Framework as Measured by the Advance 3b MOTP score. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? 4 year graduation rate 6 year graduation rate --- --- 2018-19 CEP-RISE 48  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. The creation of quality rubrics based on key proficiency standards. Teachers will consistently use and refine these rubrics to assess student performance. Actionable and timely feedback to students. Teachers will meet to LASW and develop actionable feedback. Cambridge coaches will support teaches in developing timely and quality feedback (weekly). Teachers will create conditions for students to assume a greater responsibility for their learning through self and peer assessment and goal setting. Teachers 4 and 6 year graduation rate Teachers 4 and 6 year graduation rate Monitoring of student learning including checking for understanding during instruction. Through one to one caching and inter visitations teachers will reflect Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School administration 4 and 6 year graduation rate Teachers CBO Community groups Principal CBO Director September 2018 to June 2019 Ongoing Administrators CBO 4 and 6 year graduation rate September 2018 to June 2019 Principal CBO Director weekly - Monday PD and during the day September 2018 to June 2019 Ongoing Principal CBO Director Principal CBO Director September 2018 to June 2019 Ongoing How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Students self assessment using the rubrics Improvement in student outcomes based on feedback provided. Revisions to student work, as appropriate Classroom observations indicate that students are self and peer assessing work Classroom observations resulting in increase in "effective" 3d ratings; development of flexible groups based on checking for 2018-19 CEP-RISE 49  on their ability to use data and in the moment checks for understanding 4b – Parent and Family Engagement understanding data How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the academic year (2018-2019) key events will inform parents about our school leadership vision at Orchard Collegiate Academy. (Family Night September 28th...Student Led Conferences December 15th...Student Led Conferences April 26th...Forum May 24th). In addition we will hold monthly Community School team Meetings , PTA , SLT to gain feedback on school leadership. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Professional Learning materials (copies, supplies); per session for teachers; Principal, Assistant Principal, Curriculum Instructional Leads, MFSC, Classroom Teachers, ELL and Special Educational Needs Teachers, Curriculum Resources ( Engage NY, Social Studies Passport Curriculum ) Henry Street Settlement Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2018, 60% of teachers will have been rated effective or higher on Danielson Framework component 3b as measured by observation reports Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Observation ratings in component 3b Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 50  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. (aligned with Rise Key 2) 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. (aligned with Rise Key 4 and 6) 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. (aligned with Rise Key 5) 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. (aligned with Rise Key 3) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X x 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? As a community school, we have developed a strong collaboration with a respected neighborhood organization, Henry Street Settlement, through which structures for community engagement and communication have already been formed. Since the former Henry Street School for International Studies has now been renamed to the Orchard Collegiate Academy which has a different curriculum, mission and focus and seeks to intensify its ability to prepare students for college and career readiness. This re-branding requires extraordinary efforts to inform parents, community and existing DOE offices of these changes so that students appropriately matched to the mission and vision of the school can be aware of the new school and will apply. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for strong family and community ties at your school? What opportunities exist for the school staff to know the students and their families in order to better communicate and partner with families and communities in the vision for the school? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 51  Our vision for strong family and community ties includes the following: Monthly Community School Team (CST) Meetings - We will include the Orchard Collegiate Academy principal, teachers, community leaders and parents/caregivers in our CST monthly meetings to deepen leadership roles. Community members and parents will be actively involved in driving school change and ensuring that the program model is meeting the individual needs of the students and the school. Key stakeholders already identified include other programs within the Settlement, including our Workforce Development Center, Parent Resource Center, Neighborhood Resource Center, and Abrons Arts Center. Additional stakeholders will include Leadership, Vaughn College, and Hall of Science. Further stakeholders will be identified and secured once a complete needs assessment is completed by school personnel, students, and families. To date, school administration and CBO administration have discussed important milestones relative to program impact on student achievement, including teacher and student average daily attendance, average GPA, number of students graduating on time and college ready, numbers of behavior incidents, quantity and quality of teacher professional development, opportunities for student leadership and community service, and enrollment growth. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Orchard Collegiate Academy has created a Family Center into which parents, and caregivers are welcomed on a daily basis to use available technology as well as meet with our Parent Coordinator and Community Associate. Further, parents will be offered workshops and courses to support them in such areas as ESL, resume writing, employment workshops, and sessions on how to use and support their children. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Through the Community School structures and professional learning offered, parents and guardians will work closely with our CBO and teacher leads to develop the confidence and skills to enable them as representatives of all stakeholders. We are encouraging parents and students to become members of the CEC1 and are providing them with the supports needed. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? Through regular Forums, community meetings, SLT and PTA meetings, parents and community stakeholders will be come immersed in the goals of the school and school policies for feedback and discussion. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 52  How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Through PTAand SLT. Family partnerships with CBO: Through Community Meetings, Forums and Family nights. Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Family Center on the first floor. CBOOffice for parents/guardians to work closely with Henry Street Settlement What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success, in addition to report cards? Graduation Pathway meetings and Student Led Conferences with all families. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, parent turnout at Student Led Conferences will be increase 15% (this includes both the SLCs) Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve 4 Year Graduation Rate 6 Year Graduation Rate --- 2018-19 CEP-RISE 53  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Information about the new Orchard Collegiate Academy to be distributed to all stakeholders The creation Enrollment team to conduct outreach activities Parent Coordinator will utilize more PTA support during academic year to reach out to our parent body Create effective Student Led Conferences and Forum nights to increase parent participation in their child's learning Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) CBO 4 and 6 yr graduation rate September 2018 to Jan. 2019 Principal CBO Director Teachers Counselors CBO 4 and 6 yr graduation rate September 2018 to June 2019 Principal Counselor CBO Director Parents/Guardians 4 and 6 yr graduation rate 2018 to June 2019 Principal CBO Director Ongoing PC Teachers Counselors 4 and 6 yr graduation rate December and April Principal CBO CBO Director 2018 to June 2019 PC How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Website and brochure creation and continued development Reports of mtgs with enrollment centers, middle schools. Increase in students selecting Orchard for next year Log of PTA mtgs and individual meetings with parents; increase in parents at information meetings; increased enrollment Increase in parent attendance at conferences and forum nights 2018-19 CEP-RISE 54  Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. In Counselors, Henry Street Settlement, funds for brochures, website development, , Americorp Parent outreach personnel; per session funds ; Community Associate Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By December 2018 parent attendance at our Forum and SLC will increase by 10% when compared to 2017-2018 Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent logs and sign in sheets Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 55  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should aligned to the Rise Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Rise ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019 90% of students will gain a credit in the academic intervention classes of the ELT/After School program Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory Rise ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Rise ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Rise ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. We will continue to actively communicate both the ELT and After-School programs and the benefits of student participation through a range a communication tools including: Notices., Parent Notification, School Messenger, PTA , morning meetings Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Rise School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 56   How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? OCA recommends a range of expanded learning/enrichment activities, including: Academic Enrichment : OCA would offer 4 enrichment offerings that enable students who do not need an intervention class to choose an elective of their choice . Academic Intensives: OCA will offer 5 Intensives in which students will be programmed based on their credit deficiencies and/or reading or math intervention programmes. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. OCAwill be responsible for implementation of the ELT program, in partnership with school administration, teachers, students and families. Teachers will have to apply to postings for the pro rata positions. per session will be paid for teachers that run the after school programs that run concurrently with ELT. Oversight will ultimately be provided by the Administration. Some enrichment courses will be offered in collaboration with the Space Science Center. Individual student achievement will be assessed based on students increasing Reading and Math levels in the intervention programs and based on overall credit accumulation. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. ELT will be implemented throughout the entire school year (September 9, 2018 - June 28, 2019) for those students who have credit deficiencies or are in need of Regents Prep. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Pro Rata for teachers and administration for the ELT program. Per Session for teachers that are part of the after school program Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside C4E 2018-19 CEP-RISE 57  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded X SIG Grant School X Achievement Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 1st 2019 75% of students in the ELT program will have obtained 1 credit. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Credit accumulation from STARS and the New Vision Tracker Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 58  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) How is the Community School strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The Community School strategy is directly integrated into academic support. Through the Success Mentor structure (utilizing the New Visions portal) we are able to communicate academic deficiency with students who are at risk of failing a class or Regents. Members of the CBO co facilitate the grade team meetings where academic interventions are created for individual students. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019 70 % of our lowest third students in 9th and 10th grade will be on track (credit and Regents) as a direct result of participation in Henry Street Settlement programming Please answer the following question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? The support of the Community School Strategy will enable OCA to meet the required RISE benchmarks for the academic year 2018-2019 Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Henry Street Settlement students Socio Emotional Support --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- Part 2b. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time 2. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 59  3. 4. (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. As indicated in the earlier sections, Orchard Collegiate Academy has partnered with Henry Street Settlement (HSS) as our CBO. There will be a full time CBO Director based at the school who will serve as part of the School Leadership team and coordinate on-site programming. As a partner in the school, HSS will provide support and programming to address mental health, family engagement, attendance, and expanded learning. Mental Health: HSS will provide weekly individual and group counseling to OCA students based on academic standing, previous chronic absenteeism, recent attendance struggles, referral, and/or walk-in availability. HSS will inform students and families of community partners and resources during the program’s kickoff events, provide resources during family assessments, conduct formal workshops and presentations, and also conduct informational tabling during school-wide events such as parent-teacher conferences. In addition, students with chronic mental health concerns will receive ongoing support through the School-Based Mental Health Clinic (SBMHC), also provided by HSS. HSS currently operates an Article 31 OMH licensed clinic, which has been a leader in mental health services within the Lower East Side since 1946 located across the street from the school. We also run School-Based Mental Health Clinics (SBMHC) in five local schools, serving over 150 elementary-middle schoolers. Over the past year HSS worked to establish an on-site, fully integrated SBMHC at OCA. These services are delivered by experienced and culturally sensitive LCSW and mental health counseling staff. They include a wide range of appropriate interventions and resources for students, parents, and the OCA staff. The SBMHC staff will work directly with the school team along with the principal and CSD to assess and determine specific school (universal interventions) and classroom‐level and small group behavioral health interventions towards mental health (MH) awareness and connecting youth to services to improve the school climate. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 60  The SBMHC will significantly enhance resource development for mental health services and meet these Community School RFP goals:  Offer mental health services to all students who need them. The SBMHC will have an appropriate number of  experienced MH staff embedded within OCA. Increase access to universal, selective, and targeted mental health services, including clinical treatments using evidence‐based models and practices. All MH services will use evidence-based models. Our school-wide services, such as workshops and staff trainings listed below, will deliver universal interventions. Selective interventions, including early or preventive interventions will take place through group work. Targeted services will be offered on a short-term or long-term basis. Interventions may include one or a combination of behavioral modification, trauma- focused cognitive behavioral therapy, crisis intervention, and/or medication management, home visits and referrals, among others.  Educate teachers, students, and parents about mental health issues and practices. Our SBMHC will positively affect the culture of the school and enhance programming by providing resources such as workshops and professional development on topics per the needs assessment. Student workshops will cover relevant topics like self-care or conflict resolution. Staff will receive education about mental health issues, early detection and prevention, education and classroom support, among others. Parent offerings may include topics like decreasing stress around test-taking and recognizing signs of common mental health disorders in adolescents/effective treatment options.  Decrease stigma around mental health in the school community . We will hold events like a Mental Health  Awareness Month to de-stigmatize mental health treatment and show what types of modalities and treatment we are using. Leverage opportunities within the school and the community to provide needed services to students and parents . We will collaborate with school services to maximize our impact. Within the community, our nearby Article 31 clinic has an on staff psychiatrist. Our Health Navigators can help uninsured families enroll in health insurance plans. Family Involvement HSS will conduct family assessments and home visits for parents of high-risk youth. HSS will partner closely with Parent Coordinators to formulate the best strategy for parent engagement, which will include monthly Community School Team meetings with parents and other key stakeholders in the school. Parent workshops facilitated by HSS and/or partner organizations and will focus on topics relevant to the high school population, such as college access, Common Core in the high school curriculum, Regents and SAT preparation, as well as violence/drug abuse, STD, and pregnancy prevention. HSS will also use parent-teacher conferences and other school events as opportunities to engage with parents. HSS will partner with the SLT to facilitate meetings, mailings, “robocalls,” mass texts, flyers, and emails to remind families and students about school events and policies. In addition, HSS in collaboration with the school will implement 2 school-wide events throughout the year to engage families and elicit feedback about school programming and performance in order to inform the vision of the school. Attendance HSS attendance improvement programming incorporates innovative short-term individual incentives and long-term group incentives. For example, on a biweekly basis, students who meet attendance criteria are awarded with gift cards or movie tickets; on a monthly basis, students who meet targeted attendance minimums are eligible to participate in a field trip (bowling, ice skating, etc). At the end of each semester and school year, the top 3-5 students 2018-19 CEP-RISE 61  who demonstrate the greatest improvement in attendance/academics, and/or achieve the best overall attendance and grades receive larger incentives/awards. The CSD will facilitate a weekly attendance meeting with key school stakeholders to review data and target student for additional attendance intervention strategies. Students identified as chronically absent or at-risk will receive supports from a Social Worker, Social Work Intern, or Success Mentor. College Readiness HSS will provide college advising and college readiness support to all HS students. The College Counselor will provide individual counseling support to 11th and 12th grade students in order to help with the college selection, application, and enrollment process. Additionally, the College Counselor will implement workshops for all grade levels to support college readiness needs on topics such as standardized test preparation, college essay writing, and conducing the college search. HSS will work collaboratively with the interdisciplinary college team at OCA to create a vertical alignment and curriculum plan to address college readiness for every grade level. Community Forums: HSS will work with school leadership to host inaugural and ongoing community forums to engage parents, caretakers, and community members about the reforms taking place at the school and show parents how they can actively participate in the community school and their child’s education. Parent leadership will be integral at these forums to help get buy-in, providing an important venue for ongoing dialogue about the successes and challenges of the new programs and changes at the school. Further, it will provide an ongoing opportunity to incorporate the expertise and knowledge of parents and community members into all assessment and planning activities. Monthly Community School Team (CST) Meetings - We will include the OCA principal, teachers, community leaders and parents/caregivers in our CST monthly meetings to deepen leadership roles. Community members and parents will be actively involved in driving school change and ensuring that the program model is meeting the individual needs of the students and the school. Arts Enrichment: HSS would leverage the resources of our Abrons Arts Center in support of expanded learning/enrichment activities. The Abrons operates StudioLab, a robust arts-in-education program that places talented artists in a variety of disciplines—music, dance, theater, and visual arts—into after-school programs. In FY14, StudioLab partnered with 17 public schools throughout the city, providing more than 1,500 students with in-school and after-school arts experiences to deepen students’ understanding of historical and contemporary art forms. Part 3 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 62  3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Henry Street Settlements’ full-time school based CBO director will be responsible, under the direction of the school principal for implementing overseeing the Community School. The CSD will be responsible for helping coordinate the service provided by other partner CBO's in the building, including Leadership. The Community School Team will be comprised of key community stakeholders, including the CSD, Principal, Parent Coordinator, Leadership Program Coordinator, UFT Representative, Dean, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, College Counselor, parent leaders, and student representatives. Meetings will take place on a monthly basis and will be coordinated by the CSD. The agenda will utilize school data to reflect on programming and progress toward school goals. The meetings will serve as an opportunity to think critically about the key areas of growth, which will inform the vision and programming in the school. The CSD and Community School Team will utilize student data reflected in the data sorter to track student attendance and target students for specific attendance interventions as well as to ensure and student's credit gaps are adequately addressed. HSS will help to facilitate biweekly Grade Team Meetings in which teachers will have the opportunity to have data-driven instructions about student work and collaboratively develop appropriate interventions and strategies to address student concerns. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Henry Street Settlement, Mental Health Clinic, Leadership Program, Parent Workshops, PD Material based around socio-emotional guidance, Counselors, Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2015 is the proposed start date for the Community School program. Which will initially focus on: ● Counseling ● Social worker support ● Expanded Learning Time ● Family and Community Engagement ● On site College office ● SAT Preparation classes coupled with on-site college counseling services ● School-Based Mental Health Clinic (SBMHC) Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan 2018-19 CEP-RISE 63  Separate from this R-CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 64  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) during the school day College and career readiness index, scholarship reports, formative and summative assessments; Academic Intervention student plans Corrective Action Plans Pull out Mathematics in HS Imagine Math for all students Small group, after school tutoring; Whole Class instruction, After school Times per year. HS Saturday Regents prep 7 Sessions in 2018-19 CEP-RISE 65 Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Review of data College and career readiness index, Scholarship reports, Formative and summative assessments; Gates MacGinitiediagnostic assessmentAcademic Intervention student plans Corrective Action Plans Review of data Team  Senior Saturday Academy in January  Regents Preparation with Saturday Academy  Group Instruction;  Whole Class instruction  After school tutoring in targeted skills  ELT  Saturday Academy Reading  Science College and career readiness index, scholarship reports, formative and summative assessments; Academic Intervention student plans Corrective Instruction Action Plans tutoring in targeted skills – Offers hands on lab experiences Tuesdays and Thursdays AIS, after school -STEM classes with the NYCAAM During the School Day Social Studies College and career readiness index, scholarship reports, formative and summative assessments; Academic Intervention student plans Senior Saturday Academy Corrective Instruction Action Plans Targeted Instruction in Global and US ELT US History Regents Preparation; Group Instruction At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Counseling Services provided by GC and on site outside agency, turning points Corrective Action Plans Mental Health Clinic Weekly Group meetings - stress management, socialization groups, success mentoring, Advisors Small group meetings, Clinic one on one, mandated counseling groups and one on one January and May and June ELT Saturday School Academy . HS Saturday Regents prep 7 Sessions in January and May and June ELT Saturday School Academy per year. HS Saturday Regents prep 7 Sessions in January and May and June ELT During the day. Pull out for individual counseling. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 66  2018-19 CEP-RISE 67  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Counseling, success mentors and services provided by our family center 11 students Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). na 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 68  na 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. na 2018-19 CEP-RISE 69  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The following are the strategies and activities used for recruitment, retention, assignments and support including High Quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All teachers are given professional development (PD) weekly, as well as on professional development days dedicated to staff development. Positions are posted on the online Department of Education web site where candidates can apply. Teachers are mentored by a master teacher. All new teachers are mentored by an experienced and well-developed teacher. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our Instructional Focus and Professional Development will be on setting up and implementing four Data Driven Instruction Cycles Purpose: To closely examine student mastery of content and to use data to create targeted lessons that specifically address student deficiencies ∙ Creation and implementation of quarterly interim assessments ∙ One-on-one data analysis meetings with admin after each interim assessment ∙ 2-3 day corrective teaching periods after each interim assessment ∙ Follow up data meetings to review data from retaught standards ∙ Training in Scantron/Excel Sheets ∙ Students provided with Student Proficiency Sheets after each interim assessment ∙ Students track own progress and set goals 2018-19 CEP-RISE 70  ∙ Targeted review and tutoring sessions based on data analysis ∙ Mock Regents in Fall and Spring Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher teams evaluate the effectiveness of the multiple assessment measures used within the units of study in quarterly interim assessments. Assessment results on a class level will be utilized to revise the units of study. Grade and Department level data will inform school wide decisions to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (R-CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the 2018-19 CEP-RISE 71  amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column B Column A Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 93,126.00 0 0 0 1,211,783,.00 Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 72  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/R-CEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 73  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current R-CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Orchard Collegiate Academy], in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students OCA will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 74  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA /State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 75  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) OCA,, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 76  the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 77  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act. Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 78  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 79  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 80  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 01 School Name Orchard Collegiate Academy Borough Manhattan School Number 292 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Miles Doyle Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Kemaul Simbhu Teacher/Subject Area Ilana Kurzer/Special Ed. Teacher/Subject Area Julianne Rosselli/ELA Related-Service Provider Karina Shaoul Superintendent Daniella Phillips Assistant Principal Anita Bonner Coach School Counselor Krystle Arcelay Parent Ann Plantamura Parent Coordinator Sandra Baez Field Support Center Staff Member Pedro De La Cruz Other (Name and Title) Dayna Hamann, Community School C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 221 2018-19 CEP-RISE 81 Total number of ELLs 33 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.93%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 00 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At the beginning of the school year, we administer the Gates and McGinitie Reading Assessment to all students in grades 9-12 to determine their initial reading level. All Core subject areas administer diagnostics and 4 quarterly interim assessments that monitor our ELL student's progress with literacy standards. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All departmental teams create Corrective Instructional Action Plans (for every quarter) with a focus on vocabulary progression for ELL students The analysis of the data reveals that the need to differentiate instruction and modify as needed based on reading levels. This 2018-19 CEP-RISE 82  data supports the need to target instruction to improve our ELLs’ reading comprehension skills. Because of this, in our ELL and content area classes, we are focusing on reading strategies, such as paraphrasing, annotation, identifying main idea, forming questions, and note-taking. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use different criteria to evaluate the success of our ENL program. In addition to tracking a student's level on the NYSESLAT exams, we also analyze the modality report (RNMR). We look at the disaggregated data and use this information to modify our instruction and track our progress annually. Similarly, we compare our students' Regents exam data to the rest of the school; we look at credit accumulation and consistently monitor progress towards graduation. We also use item analysis to identify areas in which we want to focus. Our supports (SIOP strategies, afterschool tutoring, homework help and 9th period ((Extended Learning Time))) are all put in place with one end goal in mind: All ELL students graduating within 4 years. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Departmental and Grade Teams work closely with the ENL teacher to continue to refine curriculum and develop appropriate scaffolding with the Core subject areas. Students needing additional reading and writing support and placed into our Rewards Reading Intervention Program. Students will also be given consistent opportunities to build their oral fluency through high yield discussion strategies (pairings, small groups, whole group Socratic Seminar discussion) honing their listening and speaking skills. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We are a High School 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data reveals that we have the greatest number of ELLs performing at the Transitioning and Expanding levels. Therefore there still remains a great need to focus instruction on Reading Comprehension, Fluency and Vocabulary hile developing writing abilities. The data from the May 2015 NYSESLAT is as follows: Grades 9-12: Entering 2; Emerging 4; Transitioning 6; Expanding 12; Commanding 0 Entering: 3/28 (11%) Emerging: 7/28 (25%) Transitioning 5/28 (18%) Expanding 13/28 (46%) Commanding 0/28 (0%) 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Programming Team, Instructional Leadership Team and the Grade Teams all work closely with our ENL teacher to make the appropriate adjustments throughout the academic year. ENL students are tracked on 3 key Power Targets (Vocabualary, Claim, Evidence) over the course of 4 interim assessments. Theachers revise and refine unitplans, lesson plans and scaffold appropriately to address student misconceptions highlighted by our interims. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 CEP-RISE 83  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. To the fullest extent possible, ELLs are programmed according to the new guidelines set forth in CR Part 154. We are a small school, of less then 200 students, serving grades 9-12 with one certified ENL teacher. The guidelines require the following: ENTERING 540 minutes 180 Stand Alone ENL 180 Integrated ELA/ENL 180 Flex (Pull-Out or Push-in Content ENL) EMERGING 360 minutes 90 Stand Alone ENL 180 Integrated ELA/ENL 90 Flex (Pull-Out or Push-in Content ENL) TRANSITIONING 180 minutes -0- Stand Alone ELA/ENL 90 Integrated Content ENL 90 Flex (Pull-Out or Push-in Content ENL) EXPANDING 180 minutes -0- Stand Alone ENL -0- Integrated ELA/ENL 180 Integrated Content ENL b. TBE program. If applicable. We are a Free Standing Program c. DL program. If applicable. We are a Free Standing Program 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Currently our ENL services are provided by one ENL Licensed pedagogue, Kemaul Simbhu. In order to program students according to their mandated instructional minutes, NYSESLAT data is reviewed to determine each students' proficiency level. In addition to that data, students prior academic history is considered ni order to ensure the most appropriate program. This is done in collaboration between the ESL Coordinator, Programmer, Guidance Counselor and Assistant Principal. According to the revised CR-Part 154, ENTERING level students are slated to receive 540 minutes [(180 Integrated ENL; 180 Stand Alone ELA/ENL; 180 Flexible (Stand Alone or Integrated Content ENL)], EMERGING level students are slated to receive 360 minutes (90 Stand Alone ENL); 2018-19 CEP-RISE 84  180 Integrated ELA/ENL; 90 Flexible (Stand Alone or Integrated Content ENL)], TRANSITIONING level students are slated to receive 180 minutes [90 Integrated Content ENL; 90 Flex (Stand Alone or Integrated Content ENL)], and EXPANDING level students are slated to receive 180 minutes of Integrated Content ENL. Students receiving content area Integrated ENL services, receive these services in their science or Social Studies classroom. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content area pedagogue makes their lesson available to the ENL teacher in advance to allow time for differentiation of the content to be delivered during the class. The content classes are delivered in English with native language support through the use of glossaries, bilingual dictionaries, translators, and when possible, materials in the native languages. Glossaries and bilingual dictionaries are available to all teachers for use in their classes. In addition to this, teachers use SIOP methodologies to support the learning of all of their students. These strategies are especially helpful to ELLs and do not take away from instruction. These methodologies include, but are not limited to visual cues, writing prompts, sentence starters, flexible grouping, explicit instruction of vocabulary, and presenting information in multiple modalities. Lessons are planned with the CCLS as a guide. Scaffolding allows ELL students to comprehend the content in order to foster language development in English. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Because we only provide ENL instruction here, we do not regularly evaluate ELLs in their native languages. We do, however, evaluate incoming Spanish-speaking students using the LAB in Spanish. In addition to this, students are given the option to take exams in their native languages and, when available, exam materials are given to the students in their native languages. We believe in using the native language as a support for students' English acquisition whenever possible. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Within our ENL instructional model, we further support SIFE students by offering extra literacy supports, and counseling, if necessary, to help address the emotional needs of the students. The thing we focus on the most with the SIFE students in meta-cognitive strategies and study skills. During tutoring and in class, we work with the students to help them learn effective note-taking, methods to study, and literacy skills. These are skills that we focus on with all of our students, but we place particular emphasis on SIFE students in this area. b. At admission, each newcomer is interviewed and their needs are assessed. We use this information in their scheduling. We often find that our newcomers test at an Entering level because they have not taken English in their home country and subsequently score low on the reading and writing sections of the NYSITELL. Because of this, we have offered many of them extra ENL support during their first year so that they can better build a foundation in the listening/speaking modalities of the English language. In addition to this, we offer native language support, after-school tutoring, and we maintain constant communication between the newcomers' teachers and the ENL teachers. This is very important for support for the newcomers, but also to support the teachers of the newcomers in providing the best instruction possible. c. We recognize that students who have been here for 4 years have different needs than newcomers. We look at each student individually to assess their language needs, using the NYSESLAT results and we work to make sure that each unit incorporates listening, speaking, reading, and writing activities so that the students get an authentic language learning experience. In addition to this, we focus on study skills and methods to make sure that students are getting the most out of what they are hearing and reading in their content classes. The students are taught meta-cognitive strategies, such as paraphrasing, forming questions, and annotating, to help them to function best in a classroom environment. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 85  d. Because long-term ELLs usually have much higher proficiency in speaking/listening than they do in reading/writing, their need for support is not as obvious. To that end, we make the NYSESLAT reports [RLAT and RNMR(when available)] available to our teachers, so that they know the true language needs of their ELLs. Also, because many of our long-term ELLs are students with IEPs, we work closely with the Special Education department to implement students' IEPs and accommodations and to diagnose issues and differentiate instruction to best serve these students. In addition to this, we work to teach study skills and meta-cognitive strategies, as we do with all of our ELL subgroups. e. Former ELLs are required, by CR-Part 154.2, to be serviced for 90 minutes (Push-In ELA/ENL or Push-in Content ENL). Commanding level students, receiving services, receive them in either Science or Social Studies. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? A number of our long-term ELLs are also SWDs. Because of this, we focus heavily on literacy and reading comprehension. We have a variety of grade-level materials available to the students to make the content more accessible to students of varying abilities. Websites are available to analyze lexile of readings and to produce the same readings at different reading levels, this allows these students to access the same content as others at an appropriate level for comprehension; video clips from websites are available for use in classes in order to support and reinforce learning through visual representations; and glossaries are given to students (bilingual or monolingual) to assure that they are able to comprehend vocabulary from the readings. On top of this, teachers use strategies to help students attain and retain the content that is delivered. Teachers model the work for students; activate prior knowledge; demonstrate text annotation; and have students read in small groups with differentiated group roles and structured notes and annotation. In addition to this, ENL teachers work with content area teachers to align the skills and concepts that they teach with what the content area teachers are focusing on as much as possible, especially in Social Studies due to the abundance of rich academic language/past tense/visuals such as charts/maps/use of paraphrase. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school is an inclusive school with ICT classes. The IEP/ENL committee completes a comprehensive evaluation for our ELL-SWDs to make a recommendation for the least restrictive environment. We provide our ELL-SWDs their academic instruction within the least restrictive environment, according to their IEPs. All instruction and assessments are delivered according to the recommendations of the IEP committee. The teachers of ELL-SWDs also differentiate the process, content, and product so that all students have the opportunity to achieve academic competency and success. Accommodations are made for the students in all aspects of instruction and assessment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs identified as struggling in the areas of ELA, math and other core content areas are provided with targeted intervention services. The Integrated ENL teacher to Science class for 10 th and 11 th grade ELLs, provides individual and small-group support as needed. The Stand Alone ENL classes provide additional history/Civics content paired with writing and development of meta-cognitive skills to support students identified as struggling in those subjects. 9 th , 10 th and 11 th grade ELLs, identified as struggling in ELA, receive ELA support in the ENL class, correlating with skills/literature taught in ELA classes. 9th and 10th Grade Expanding Students receive additional Global History content in the ENL class, paired with writing and meta-cognitive skills to reinforce learning. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will implement an intensive coaching program for the ENL teacher and conduct ENL focused PD in our whole faculty. Through Extended Learning Time we will provide ELL students with the opportunity to get help with homework, test 2018-19 CEP-RISE 86  preparation, and extra language support. The program is held in room 237B, which has dictionaries, glossaries, and has been recently furnished with 9 Mac Desktops for online literacy programs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We did not have a bilingual program in the previous year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. We are aware of the importance of allowing our ELLs to have the same access to our school programs as other students. Our school works with Leadership Program and our C.B.O., Henry Street Settlement, to offer clubs and sports as well as tutoring and other after-school activities. ELLs are encouraged to attend the programs that interest them and the announcements are made available to the ENL teachers and through Home Language for clarification. ELLs are never excluded from participation. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We are aware of the potential for technology to aid in language development and acquisition. Each classroom in the school is furnished with a Smartboard and projector and each teacher is given a laptop and an iPad, in addition to their desktop classroom computer. The iPads are given to students for adapted texts, native language translation, or alternate assignments. The Smartboard Notebook Software, as well as PowerPoint, are used for visuals, video clips, and manipulation in ways that a standard chalkboard or whiteboard cannot. Additionally, we have 7 laptop carts and an iPad cart that are checked out and utilized. Some key classroom notes are offered to Entering and Emerging level students in their native language to promote comprehension. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In all content areas, there are measures taken to give native language support to ELLs. Though not all teachers speak other languages, bilingual glossaries are available in the subject areas, as well as dictionaries and electronic translators. We also have a large number of staff who speak other languages; these staff members can be used for support, translation, and parental outreach. Teachers also work with Kemaul Simbhu to find materials that are grade-appropriate and support students in the native languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required resources and support correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels. As we are a small school of less than 200 students we are able to track student literacy through our department and grade teams using our inquiry cycles in our Data Driven Instruction. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are a co-located educational complex we are aware of the potential for technology to aid in language development and acquisition. Each classroom in the school is furnished with a Smartboard and projector and each teacher is given a laptop and an iPad, in addition to their desktop classroom computer. The iPads are given to students for adapted texts, native language translation, or alternate assignments. The Smartboard Notebook Software, as well as PowerPoint, are used for visuals, video clips, and manipulation in ways that a standard chalkboard or whiteboard cannot. Additionally, we have 7 laptop carts and an iPad cart that are checked out and utilized. Some key classroom notes are offered to Entering and Emerging level students in their home language to promote comprehension. In addition Kemaul Simbhu (ENL teacher) will be meeting with the Middle School ENL teacher within the Corlears Complex. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We conduct school tours and orientation for new students during the spring semester and during the summer. These tours and orientations are conducted by Ms. Sandra Baez, our parent coordinator, and our teachers and staff. Interpretation is 2018-19 CEP-RISE 87  made available to students and parents and all information is translated into various languages. Our goal is that incoming ELLs and their families feel just as welcome as all of our other students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We currently offer Spanish Language and Spanish Literature to ensure that they are building on their skills in both languages. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We are a Free Standing ENL program Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In an effort to assist teachers, administrators, secretaries, and support staff in addressing the needs of ELLs, the following professional development opportunities will be offered to our teachers in all subject areas. -Using ENL data to inform instruction: -Encourage staff to register for graduate courses offered in differentiated instruction and ENL methodology. -Continue to provide teachers, administrators, guidance counselors, psychologists, and other staff with professional literature to build awareness as to the needs of ELLs and best practices to address those needs. -Kemaul Simbhu will work with staff on a continual basis to guide them with ENL strategies. -Continue to train teachers and administrators in the Common Core Standards and how they apply to ELLs. The ENL teacher is provided several opportunities annually to receive targeted professional development in working with date, policy and pedagogy. This year, we will be working with our staff on using the ICT Model in our lesson planning and execution. ICT methodologies will be modeled by Mr. Simbhu and the incoming ENL coach during staff developments and PD Days. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Aside from being invited to student orientations, teachers are invited to work with Mr. Simbhu to learn about the social aspects of being an ELL. Mr. Simbhu furnishes the teachers with the Years of Service Report (RYOS) and works with teachers with specific students' needs. Our school's guidance counselor is provided with Professional Development which includes best practices for support ELLs as they transition between elementary and middle or middle and high school. The minimum hours of ELL training for all staff will happen at different times throughout the school year. The training will include differentiating, addressing the needs of ELLs at different level of English proficiency and incorporating best practices for including ELLs in classroom discussions and activities, regardless of English proficiency. Mr. Simbhu will present at grade-team meetings during CPT, as well as at Monday staff meetings to share ICT strategies and other ENL teaching methodologies. The ENL teacher will receive professional development equaling 50% of his total PD hours. All records for professional development will be kept on file with the assistant principal. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 88  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Late in the Fall semester, our Parent Coordinator, Sandra Baez, works with Kemaul Simbhu to amass the most current list of ELLs in our school. Parents/guardians of ELLs are then contacted, in their preferred language, to invite them to meet individually with school staff to review the following at their Student Led Conferences: - the goals of their child's program - their child’s language development progress - their child’s English language proficiency assessment results - language development needs in all content areas When necessary, a qualified interpreter/translator provides support in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. These meetings are scheduled by our parent coordinator and support staff. They occur at various points throughout the day, in order to accommodate the parents' needs. Teachers of ELLs prepare, in advance, the information to be shared about their individual classes. information about assessments is prepared by school support staff under the direction of our school's ENL Coordinator. In the event parents are unable to attend a face to face meeting they are giving the opportunity to engage in a phone conference. We also send an email with a translated written version if necessary and maintain a phone log. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school has an active parent coordinator, Sandra Baez, who works with the PTA to hold regular meetings and workshops which are inclusive of all interested parents. These include the school leadership team, 9th grade parent orientation, Internet safety workshop for parents, credits informational workshop for parents, parent involvement meetings and other school events. Notifications and materials are available in various languages, and given based on the responses to the Home Language Identification Surveys. Additionally, Kemaul Simbhu surveys parents in the fall semester to see what their wants and needs are in regards to academics and social issues. Based on that information, workshops are organized for ELL parents. These workshops occur in the fall and spring semesters. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 89 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Miles Doyle, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 90  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Orchard Collegiate Academy School DBN: 01M292 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Miles Doyle Title Principal Anita Bonner Assistant Principal Sandra Baez Parent Coordinator Kemaul Simbhu ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ann Plantamura Parent Jonathan Springer/History Teacher/Subject Area Ilana Kurzer/Special Education Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Krystle Arcelay School Counselor Daniella Phillips Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/2017 06/30/2017 06/30/2017 106/30/2017 06/30/2017 06/30/2017 06/30/2017 06/30/2017 2018-19 CEP-RISE 91  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 01M292 School Name: Henry Street School Superintendent: Ms. Phillips The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our school incorporates several methods for identifying the language preferences of our parent community. Those methods include: (A) Information Provided from NYCDOE School Forms (B) Data Analysis of the Home Aggregation Report in ATS; and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 92  (C) Data Analysis from Informal Surveys (A): Information Provided from NYCDOE School Forms: As the initial point of contact for all families, our Main Office Management Team ensures that our school collects and retains accurate information relative to the language needs of all families. Our Main Office Team consists of the following individuals: Principal Secretary (English/Spanish); Community Associate (English/Spanish); School Aide (English/Chinese); and Parent Coordinator (English/Spanish). At the beginning of each year, all student records are updated through distribution and collection of important NYCDOE Forms. Upon collection, all completed forms are kept on file in each student's individual records for reference as needed. The form entitled "Emergency Contact Card" (Blue Card) helps in identifying parents' preferred language of communication both written and oral. (B): Data Analysis of the Home Aggregation Report in ATS: Data is culled and analyzed using the ATS Report (RHLA) entitled "Home Language Report." This data identifies the Home Languages of families broken down by grade level. This also helps in determining our language and interpretation needs throughout the school year. The data for School Year 2016 - 2017 reflects that the three most predominant languages spoken at Orchard Collegiate Academy are: English, Spanish, and Chinese When broken down by grade, the data reflects the following: HIGH SCHOOL Grade 9 Grade 10 Grade 11 Grade 12 English 54% 43% 65% 52% Spanish 22% 43% 26% 27% Chinese 12% 3% 3% 8% 2018-19 CEP-RISE 93  Other 12% 11% 6% 13% The school-wide breakdown reflects the following: English: 53% Spanish: 29% Chinese: 7% Other: 11% In summary, 47% of all students' families do not speak English at Home. With the designation of our Language Access Coordinator, Ms. Bodok, who is also our Parent Coordinator -- this information will be shared with the school community to provide awareness of the language needs represented at our school. All of the above data clearly indicates that written translation and oral interpretation are definitively a need at our school community. Translation and interpretation will be provided on a regular basis for both Spanish and Chinese for: -School Correspondence Mailings -Parent Meetings -Parent Teacher Conferences -Parent Workshops The following staff members work closely with parents in ensuring language needs are met: Ms. Ramos (Principal Secretary); Fluent in Spanish Ms. Bodok (Parent Coordinator) : Fluent in Spanish Mr. Escudero (School Para) : Fluent in Spanish Ms. Baez (Community Associate): Fluent in Spanish 2018-19 CEP-RISE 94  Ms. Poon (School Aide): Fluent in Chinese Mr. Teng (School Para): Fluent in Chinese Ms. Baez (Community Associate): Fluent in Chinese 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language As mentioned in Item #1, our data analysis shows that Spanish and Chinese are our high incident languages of non-English speaking families. Our lower incident languages include Albanian, Bengali, French, and Polish. As a school, parents' preferred language for both written and oral communication is reflected as follows: English: 53% Spanish: 29% Chinese: 7% Other: 11% In summary, 47% of all students' families do not speak English at Home. With the designation of our Language Access Coordinator, Ms. Bodok, who is also our Parent Coordinator -- this information will be shared with the school community to provide awareness of the language needs represented at our school. All of the above data clearly indicates that written translation and oral interpretation are definitively a need at our school community. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 95  Translation and interpretation will be provided on a regular basis for both Spanish and Chinese for: -School Correspondence Mailings -Parent Meetings -Parent Teacher Conferences -Parent Workshops -Parental Notification Letters in reference to NYSESLAT examination and results will continue to be distributed to parents in all available languages. Our Language Access Coordinator/Parent Coordinator, our Main Office Management Team, and our Community Based Organization collectively provide the school community with information concerning parental preferred language needs. When school and/or community interpreters are not available, our faculty and staff are encouraged to use the DOE Interpretation Unit. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 96  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. During School Year 2016 - 2017, the school plans to disseminate the following documents: Parent News Letter: "Family Night" Flyer (September 2016 / May 2017) Announcement of Parent-Teacher Conferences (Fall 2016 / Spring 2017) Flyer Announcing Clubs/Activities for 21 st Century After School Program (Fall 2016 / Spring 2017) Announcement of NYS Testing Calendar (Fall 2016 / Spring 2017) Letters from Administration (Upon Occurrence) Announcements of Special Events (Upon Occurrence) Any documents in need of translation will be done by in-school personnel. When determined as necessary, the school will utilize the Translation and Interpretation Unit (submitting the document at least two weeks in advance before dissemination). 2018-19 CEP-RISE 97  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Face - to -face Meetings that generally occur throughout the school year include: plan to provide interpretation service(s)? "Family Night" (Fall/Spring) Parent Teacher Conferences (Fall/Spring) School Leadership Team Meetings (Monthly) Parent Association Meetings (Monthly) Informal Interactions (As Needed) (Meetings/Phone Calls) occur with any of the listed personnel: Attendance Team Members (CBO Team, Attendance Teacher, Guidance Counselor, Leadership) Guidance Counselor College Advisor Main Office Management Team 2018-19 CEP-RISE 98  Community Based Partners (CBO) Parent Coordinator 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In accordance with Chancellor's Regulation A-663, our school utilizes on-site interpeters and accesses the T&I Unit's intranet site for notification documents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our Parent Coordinator will design an "informal" survey to ascertain whether or not the translation and interpretation needs of parents are being met on a regular basis. The survey will be administered at least four times throughout the school year As she's also the Language Access Coordinator, she will use the results of the survey to recommend needed changes in protocol by the school community. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 99 
