 02M298 School Name: PACE HIGH SCHOOL Principal: ERIC GLATZ   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 02M298 PACE High School 314200011298 9, 10, 11, 12 100 Hester St, New York, NY 10002 212.334.4663 Phone Number: 212.334.4919 Fax: Michael Sowiski msowiski@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Eric Glatz Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Andrew Worthington Carolyn Clark-Gonzalez Michael Sowiski Ireida Bracero Shyma Hoppe Alex Pan N/A Geographical District: 02 District Information Vivian Orlen Superintendent: 333 7 th Avenue, 7 th Floor, New York, NY 10001 Superintendent’s Office Address: vorlen@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-7563 Phone Number: (212) 356-7514 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Manhattan 2 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Avenue, 8 th Floor, New York, NY 10001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646.470.0721 Phone Number: 917.339.1765 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Eric Glatz Andrew Worthington Carolyn Clark-Gonzalez Iraida Bracero Alex Pan Shymyah Hoppe Michael Sowiski Lillian Esposito Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Chair, Assistant Principal Member/ Member/ Parent   Name Kim Broomes Carolyn Clark Gonzalez Alex Jallot Leanne O'Sullivan Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our mission is to create a college-oriented, student-centered environment where high expectations of serious work are anticipated for every student. At PACE High School, we seek to ensure that all of our students leave us with a résumé of quality experiences that will prepare them to resolve challenges they will face in college and beyond. .   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PACE High School is a small, college-prep, limited unscreened high school located in Manhattan’s Chinatown. This is our 12 th year serving students from all five boroughs with a strong track record of success. We continue to be the limited unscreened high school with the highest number of applicants in New York City. Central to our role as a small high school is that every student is known well and is appreciated for his/her unique talents and contributions to our learning community. To this end, our school curriculum and programs are tailored to the individual needs of our students to the maximum extent possible, enabling all of our students to reach the ambitious goals set for them. Working in close collaboration with PACE University’s School of Education and its faculty, the school shares the extensive resources of the entire university with significant access to classes, libraries, computer labs and recreational facilities providing extraordinary learning opportunities for our students. We have ongoing partnerships with Pace University, the Liberty Partnership Program, and Lincoln Center. Our students begin their PACE experience with First Summer, an overnight induction program before 9 th grade begins held on the Pace University campus. School of Education faculty support our school, and our students can take free university classes in the upper grades. Pace University also offers up to five full tuition scholarships to PACE High School graduates every year. Our partnership with the Liberty Partnership Program provides extra college counseling support to our students. Lincoln Center also provides theater educators and every year our students attend free world-class performances at Lincoln Center. We have a strong family culture and well-developed extracurricular offerings, from PSAL and club athletics, to tutorial programs, artistic clubs, student support groups, and performance groups. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PACE High School serves all of our learners and does not have any specific special student populations. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We have made the most progress in the area of Instruction, as evidenced by improved teacher practices observed while supervising instruction. Teacher collaboration through structured lesson study cycles has also benefited teacher practice. Key area of focus for us in 2018-2019 is creating Supportive School Environment for students that will improve student attendance and academics. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M298 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 537 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 7 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 41 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 79.0% % Attendance Rate 71.1% % Reduced Lunch 2.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 50.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.9 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 91% 89% 79.3% 9.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 111 104 2 87.3% 7.3% 19.6% 33.0% 8.0% 4.5% 2 17% 5.7 N/A N/A 96% 91% 93.8% 34% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A YES 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Advance data indicates that Danielson Component 3c: Engaging students in learning, was rated as effective/highly effective for 87% of our teachers ratings. As per our most recent Quality Review in April 2015 also indicated that rigorous and coherent curricula is an area of focus for our school. Our strengths include an interesting and challenging curriculum, as noted by students, parents, and teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we want to maintain the rate of 87% of ratings for Danielson component 3c. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development developed with teachers to address engagement in lesson planning. Subject teachers Department lesson study protocol as practiced with Learning Partners Program Subject teachers September 2017- June 2018 September 2017- June 2018 Department leads, Administration Assistant Principal, Master Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Parent Engagement events, including September "Curriculum Night" to communicate curriculum being offered in individual courses. Parent Coordinator and guidance department will oversee coordination of events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Hiring of new teachers. Per session for department coordinators Professional development time dedicated to department meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 3  January 2019 should indicate a 85% or greater effective/highly effective ratings for component 3c of Danielson Framework Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Advance system Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The schools advisory program offers students the attention of adult to support and guide them through high school. A trend noticed in 2017-2018 was even with this attention, daily attendance has trended downward. Daily attendance has dropped from 88% ('16-'17) to 87% ('17-'18) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 daily attendance will increase to 92%. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Incentive & recognition program for improved attendance and sustained excellent attendance and punctuality Targeted students. Quarterly. Wake-up call notification program through School Messenger,. Students with Family notification systems for attendance and lateness. Daily School Messenger phone calls and data attched to report cards. More accurate and timely data using CAASS system to monitor student entry time. attendance and lateness trends. All students. Strengthened Advisory curriculum and practices to increase sense of belonging. All students. Attendance team weekly meetings to identify students of concern and outreach needed Students demonstrating poor attendance (pattern of abscence) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement October 2018 to June 2019. September 2018-June 2019. Daily & Quarterly. September 2018-June 2019. Daily & Quarterly. September 2018-June 2019, weekly Administration, Dean of Students. Administration, Dean of Students. Parent coordinator Secretarial Staff & Administration. Advisory Team Leaders. Attendance team How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. From September to October advisers and parent coordinator will sign all parents up for contact information in pupilpath and school messanger. School staff, including teachers, guidance, and office staff, will analyze historical data to identify chronically late students to identify individual students to monitor and support in attending regularly, keeping close contact with families. 6  From September to June Parent Coordinator will work with Parent Association to coordinate engagement events to provide guidance to parents how to support students at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session support for intervention programs. Dean of Students position and attendance team. School Messenger and PupilPath communication systems purchased with OTPS funds. Incentive prizes supported by Parent Association. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Weekly attendance team meetings. By February 2019 student daily attendance will be above 90%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS Attendance Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school as demonstrated growth in the area of collaboration of special education and general education teachers to support individual student instructional needs, including students with disabilities. As of June 2018 53% of students with IEP's are Almost or On Track to graduate according to credits earned. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 65% of students with an IEP will be on track to graduate based on credit accumulation 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Dedicated co-planning time established in teacher schedules Parent workshops and engagement events on curriculum, assessments, and needs of different students. Department Chair training in Student Work Analysis protocols and PD for supporting Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners.. Scheduling of students off track to graduate to provide more opportunities for credit accumulation Students with IEPs 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Co-teaching pairs Families; Parent Association Department Chairs September 2018 to June 2019 October November 2018, March 2019. October 2018 to April 2019 October 2018 to April 2019 Principal Assistant Principal School Leadership, Instructional Coach Special Education coordinator Guidance dept, Special education teachers, How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Special Education teachers will outreach with parents of students with disabilities to review IEP Goals in September and October, while detailing our collaboration efforts. Parent Coordinator will detail collaboration efforts during monthly Parent Association events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Department Chair Teacher Leadership positions funded with per session support. Prep coverages for teacher intervisitations. Biweekly PD committee meetings supported with per session. Instructional coach F-Status position Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 9  X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 60% of students with IEP's are earning credit to be on track to graduate Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress to graduation report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the Framework for Great Schools Report 2017, Instructional Leadership was rated at 68% by teachers. Strengths of our school have been stable leadership and distributed leadership structures, as well as very low teacher turnover. Data indicate that we do have a need to improve this for improved coherence, trust, and inclusive principal leadership. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, instructional leadership will be rated over 80% on the school survey by teachers. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Support leadership practices of department coordinators through professional development Department coordinators August 2018 to June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Monthly open meetings with school leadership to raise concerns, ask questions, and share ideas. All faculty & staff. Department course leaders will coordinate units with other teachers Teachers September 2018 to June 2019. September 2018 to June 2019 Principal Department coordinators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Principal during monthly Parent Association meetings will detail the efforts made by the school to foster instructional leadership among staff and how teachers influence our program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for PD and retreats for teacher leaders. Funding for outside teacher professional development and conferences. Funding for teacher coverages for intervisitations and trainings. Funding for supervisor per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 75% of staff members will participate in a leadership role Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Faculty list of responsibilities Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our Quality Review affirmed the strong “family feel” of PACE High School, yet as a secondary school with students from all five boroughs serving a diverse student and family body this is still something we want to improve. During the 2017-2018 school year we held multiple events to increase parent involvement, however we would want to see more events held. Our areas of strength include a well-developed Student-Led Conference program, our Advisory structure and curriculum, cultural events that draw families, an active Parent Association, and well-developed extracurricular activities and sports that draw parents. That said, having parents be more involved with our PA, volunteering with school events, and even attending conferences is an area we need to strengthen. At other than student led conferences, there are regular parent attendees. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 the school will hold 5 parent engagement events outside of the mandated 4 family conference dates. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monthly School newsletters and announcements translated into English and Spanish. Personalized phone calls before Student-Led Conferences by Advisors Update school website developed to communicate events Monitor the attendance of a family member for individual students at school events 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Spanish-speaking families. All PACE families All PACE families and community partners All PACE students Parent Coordinator Student advisers September 2018 to June 2019 November 2018-March 2018 September 2018 School leadership & secretarial staff. September 2018 - June 2019 Advisers, Parent Coordinator If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds set aside for per session support. OTPS funds for materials, mailings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 5  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there would have been two parent engagement events outside of the two mandated by DOE. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monthly SLT meetings to review planning Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Student progress reports, benchmark assessments, Regents exams. Student progress reports, benchmark assessments, Regents exams. Student progress reports, benchmark assessments, Regents exams. Student progress reports, benchmark assessments, Regents exams. Referrals by advisors, Grade Teams, & intake by guidance counselor. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tutorials and office hours after school. Small group instruction, peer tutoring. Tutorials and office hours after school. Math Zone club. Tutorials and office hours after school. Science Club. Tutorials and office hours after school. Counseling sessions. Referrals to outside agencies. Connection to extracurriculars and support groups. Small group instruction, peer tutoring. Tutoring by college students through Liberty Partnership Program. Small group instruction, peer tutoring. Tutoring by college students through Liberty Partnership Program. Small group instruction, peer tutoring. Individual and group counseling. Extracurricular support groups (LGBTQ student group, for ex.). During school day and after school. During school day and after school. During school day and after school. During school day and after school. During the school day and after school. 7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 22 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Before and after school tutoring, work space available before and after school, supplies including notebooks, pens, pencils, apparel, referral to outside resources Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 8  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Targeted professional development, additional education courses (through our partnership with Pace University School of Education along with the DOE programs and High Objective Uniform State Standard of Evaluation (HOUSSE) system will help all our identified teachers who are working toward being highly qualified). Recruitment- Every effort is made to hire a diverse and qualified teaching staff at PACE. All staff members go through a rigorous group interview process that is facilitated by our Hiring Committee. We work to foster a supportive, collaborative environment for our faculty that gives space for innovation, experimentation, and growth to that all of our teachers can continue to develop and grow in their work as teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Frequent classroom visits, intervisitations, one-to-one coaching, grade-level and department meetings are scheduled to help support all staff members earn and retain highly qualified status. Funding from TL and Title I is set aside for professional development, attendance to conferences, and in-house training. Part 3: TA Schools Only 0  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher teams and departments give input on assessment measure practices in the school. In-house professional development examines assessment results to improve instruction and student achievement. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 1  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) $298,500 0 0 0 $3,916,208 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 2   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Pace High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PACE High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 4  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 5  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PACE High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 6  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 7  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 8  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 9  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name PACE High School Borough Manhattan School Number 298 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Eric Glatz Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mary Dreyfus Teacher/Subject Area David Rohlfing- English Teacher/Subject Area NA Related-Service Provider Lindsay Kwok Superintendent Marisol Rosales Assistant Principal Michael Sowiski Coach NA School Counselor Jazmin Montes Parent Arelis Forty Parent Coordinator NA Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 571 1 Total number of ELLs 19 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.33%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Lang. NA NA NA NA NA NA Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use previous NYSESLAT data from middle school as well as do in-house assessment using Fountas (BAS) for students who will have questions regarding their level. Our in-house English assessment (given during our First Summer program to all 9 th graders) also gives us clear indication of what types of support incoming students will need. These assessments reveal intermediate to advanced levels in listening/speaking as well as reading/writing. This influences our school's instructional plan in that we practice and push development in listening, speaking, reading and writing skills in all content areas as aligned to CCLS. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? First summer and beginning of the year assessment of incoming students, use of advisory to assess students skills 2  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We base our success on all students passing NYS Regents exams in the 3 rd year of high school with master / proficiency scores. All students in our ELL program since 2008 have passed the NYS Regents English exam in their junior/senior year before graduation from PACE HS. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? SIT analyzes data, recommends additional services and supports 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not applicable. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. All students who enter PACE as 9 th graders are assessed as Expanding or Commanding on the NYSESLAT by 11 th grade. As we have not had first-time entrants or re-entrants in the past year, NYSITELL data is not available. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We utilize our SIT Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. For the 2017-2018 school year students will be grouped together, ungraded and heterogenously, to meet with a certified ENL teacher from our cooperating school, Emma Lazarus, where appropriate instructional time will be provided to support ENL skills. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The certified ENL teacher is available one period a day for the entire week, allowing flexibility in the number of sessions a student would receive during that period throughout the week to meet the mandated number of minutes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 3  Core content is delivered in English with scaffolded supports aligned with CCLS and culminating in Regents exams. Sheltered English approaches are incorporated into our instructional methods across content areas. Some of these instructional approaches are interactive- where the teacher(s) will use debate, peer practice with complex texts, small group discussions, role-playing and co-operative learning groups to build background knowledge or so that ELLs be able to gain deeper meaning from readings. Other instructional approaches are direct, where the teacher(s) will use demonstrations, explicit teaching, and guides or checklists for reading, listening, or viewing. Teachers also incorporate graphic organizers created in the Literacy Inquiry team and content inquiry to support student writing and help them access higher level texts. Teachers also use experiential learning approaches where students construct experiments and build models. Teachers also incorporate indirect instructional approaches by using concept webbing/mapping to form big ideas around a unit theme, and use the reciprocal teaching chart and close reading protocol to build a framework to access meaning from texts that increase in complexity. Teachers also incorporate independent studies where students work to write essays on a researched topic related to a unit theme and construct an essay where they establish a claim and do research-based evidence to support their positions on an issue. Core content is delivered in through multiple instructional approaches. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The home language is used at the beginning of the year for scaffolding purposes; however, ELLs do not have a home language assessment as we do not have a TBE program. We do adminsiter the LENS and SIFE questionnaire for new entrants and this gives us insight into the child’s literacy level in their home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status It should be noted that each subgroup has specific needs, but that individual students have very different needs and experiences; as such differentiation for each individual student is important. a. SIFE: We currently have one SIFE student and he is performing at the Advanced level. He receives small group instruction during our TEEE block, and our ENL stand-alone course. He is also supported in our Advisory program which meets 5x a week, which is a space for ongoing peer and faculty support. A network of scaffolds and supports are available throughout the day in courses as well as in our after school tutorials programs. In addition, awards ceremonies are held every quarter, where students are rewarded for achievement, improvement, leadership, and demonstrating core values of empathy, collaboration, determination, and creativity. Our Advisory program and other cultural traditions are important in that they cultivate a school culture of achievement and inclusivity for all of our learners. b. Newcomer: Newcomer ELLs are expected to meet the same standards as all students. In order to achieve this goal, we make sure to reach out to and collaborate with parents of ELLs and share information regarding our school goals and what they can do at home to help support their child's progress in school and language acquisition. Newcomer ELLs also receive stand-alone ENL classes to support their work in content area classes and language acquisition. During our after school programming and with the Libery Partnership Program, they have the opportunity to participate in clubs and athletics, tutorials with peers or college tutors from Pace University, or to participate in art or music classes. c. Developing: We have two students who are developing ELLs at PACE HS who have been receiving services for 4-6 years. they are afforded the same supports as all of our students, however, their support is tailored to their needs as assessed by schoolwide Regents practice assessments, in-class formative assessments developed by department teams, parent outreach/workshops to teach parents study and literacy skils they can reinforce at home, after school tutoring programs through the Liberty Partnership Program, ENL after school programming, development of teacher strategies through PDs, and analysis of their progress through department and Advisory teams. Our students review support in NYSESLAT skills acquisition after school in addition to their regularly scheduled ESL and English classes. d. Long Term: We currently have 4 long-term ELLs who are receiving the above support and additional support in their TEEE courses. Long term ELLs benefit from all supports that all students have access to, in addition, they are supported with NYSESLAT test prep so that students are informed about the test structure and what is expected of them in regards to performance. Long term ELLs will benefit from reviewing the rubrics and looking at their level patterns since they matriculated 4  into the NYC DOE as an ELL. Many will find that they are proficient in Speaking and Listening and Advanced in Reading and Writing. This analysis of their levels throughout the years will them help understand where they might not be performing as they should be on the Reading and Writing sections of the NYSESLAT. e) Former ELLs are afforded with the same testing accommodations they had as when they still had ELL status. Former ELLs also have access to all other supports provided to all students during the school day and during extracurricular activities. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies and grade-level materials teachers of ELLs and ELLs-SWD use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development are: - Unpacking the Learning Target - Annotation strategies - Close reading strategies - Vocabulary building strategies: (word study, content-specific strategies). - Reciprocal teaching strategies - Prefix, Suffix, and Word Root study - Scaffolded graphic organizers that help students plan and organize their writing - Bilingual glossaries/dictionaries - Access to technology (Rosetta Stone) - Leveled texts in English - Co-teaching models that lend itself to station teaching for re-teaching of content - Reader’s theater/Role-plays - Word walls - Rubrics that are assignment specific and based on school-wide goals (i.e. argument writing rubrics for each grade level and the new NYSESLAT rubrics) - Expository writing workshops, including time for peer-revision and editing - Activating prior knowledge to build schema - Thoughtful grouping before lesson delivery - Questioning and discussion techniques that probe for student deeper comprehension - Small group discussions 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We are a full inclusion program with students receiving SETSS and ICT support in class and pull-out. Students like our three students are not given an additional foreign language support but support in their home language as well as English. Students also receive freestandign ENL classes. Flexibility in their schedule allows them to receive instruction in co-taught classes with a special education teacher in all core content areas. Parents have met with the grade-level team and the ICT teacher to plan scaffolded assignments and supports to that the student is helped in content as well as language acquisition. The students are also given extended time on all testing administrations. As with all students, students are provided equal access to all extracurricular activities and supports detailed above. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math and other content area are: - Extra math course in 9 th grade for all 9 th graders to support CCLS Algebra skil acquisition - After-school Tutorials with teachers and peers 4 days a week. - Math Zone support group after school 2 days a week. - Individual and small-group tutoring through the Liberty Partnership Program at Pace University. 5  - Regents prep modified schedules in January and June with targeted instruction. - Saturday Academic Remediation programs where they can get additional support in all content areas in subjects they failed or are struggling in. - SAT prep in English and home language. - NYSESLAT prep with ESL teacher after school. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are exploring blended learning programs for our students; we seek to diversify our course offerings and supports for all learners, and see that blended learning may be an option to do so. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All programs (before, during, and after school) are offered to all students. ESL pull-out during the day, after school ESL support, Saturday Regents prep, ARC, all clubs, and tutorials are available for ELLs. -Athletics: PACE has PSAL, independent school league, junior varsity, and intramural sports offerings for all seasons, including Cross Country, Soccer, Volleyball, Basketball, Softball, Bridge Running, Cheerleading, Flag Football, Badminton, and Handball. -Academic Supports After School: We offer after school tutorial supports with teachers and peers 4 days a week for all students. -Liberty Partnership Program: We partner with Pace University to offer tutoring, college counseling, and social opportunities through the Liberty Partnership Program. -Extracurricular Program for Creativity: PACE boasts an art club, yearbook club, Latin Dance, Step Team, Caribbean Dance, Hip-Hop Dance, Drama, and a Film club open to all students. -Extracurricular Programs for Social Support: PACE provides a safe space for all students through our clubs such as the Gay Straight Alliance. -Abrons Art Center Art Classes: we partner with the Abrons Art Center to offer visiting artist-taught classes after school in studio art and music production, open to all students. -Community Service Opportunities: Community service opportunities are offered to students for school functions, one-time events such as the AIDS Walk, through clubs like sponsored National Honor Society, and through student-organized social action projects. -ELLs are invited to participate by Advisory referrals and discussions, biannual club fairs, student-to-student recruitment, parent outreach, and newsletters & signage. -ELL representation: all ELLs participate in at least one extracurricular program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our school building is wireless and students use desktops, laptops, ipads, assisted listening devices (earphones, MP3 players) to help in all content areas. Teachers plan a well-rounded curriculum where technology is infused for all students. Instructional materials used to support ELLs in the content areas, as well as, language materials are: - Bilingual dictionaries/glossaries - Scaffolded class room materials (graphic organizers) - SMART board technology - Access to computer (desktop and laptops) to reinforce skills in math - English leveled texts - Visuals: video, print - Audio-translators - Rubrics (translated); NYSESLAT rubrics; school-wide writing rubrics 6  - Reference charts (English/Spanish) - Access to School Library to select independent reading books - Math manipulatives 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is used 25% during instruction in ENL mostly at the beginning of the year. The Home language is used to clarify instructions or clarify vocabulary necessary to complete a task. Our ESL teacher has discovered that after the fall, the ENL have acquired enough English language to perform. ELLs always have access to bilingual dictionaries to help clarify meaning of unfamiliar words. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services, support and resources correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. In the upper grades, the focus in Advisory and courses on transition out of high school is supplemented by our College Counseling courses which are taught to all 11 th and 12 th graders to prepare them for planning and applying to colleges. In the classroom, there is an array of fiction and non-fiction texts readily available for all students, including our ELL population. Access to and reinforcement of grade level material is also supported through our extracurricular programs (see above). 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We have a strong working relationship with co-located school Emma Lazarus who's speciality is ENL students. We collaborate regularly, including utilizing their staff to support our ENL population. Our school building is wireless and students use desktops, laptops, ipads, assisted listening devices (earphones, MP3 players) to help in all content areas. Teachers plan a well-rounded curriculum where technology is infused for all students. Instructional materials used to support ELLs in the content areas, as well as, language materials are: - Bilingual dictionaries/glossaries - Scaffolded class room materials (graphic organizers) - SMART board technology - Access to computer (desktop and laptops) to reinforce skills in math - English leveled texts - Visuals: video, print - Audio-translators - Rubrics (translated); NYSESLAT rubrics; school-wide writing rubrics - Reference charts (English/Spanish) - Access to School Library to select independent reading books - Math manipulatives 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Activities in our school include new student orientation held in the spring prior to 9 th grade. In August before 9 th grade, students participate in our overnight orientation First Summer program at Pace University. The first year of 9 th grade Advisory focuses on the successful transition to high school, building community, and building supports. PACE core values, routines, culture, and systems are included in the orientations. Parent and student meetings with Principal, AP, ESL teachers and grade level team is planned for the first month of school. Individual student programs are made based on the parent's surveys, teacher observation and results from the previous year's NYSESLAT. Most students enter PACE High School with Advanced level ELL designation on the NYSESAT. After school tutorials and ESL TEEE is scheduled. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish is the LOTE at PACE High School, but students can take other languages at Pace University such as Japanese, Italian, and German. 7  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our professional development model is geared toward increasing literacy skills in all content areas. Apart from regular PD help in house, ESL teachers attend weekly team meetings, department meetings with English, and consultation with other departments. Our guidance counselor, college counselor, and secretarial staff all receive training on supporting all of our families, including parents of ELLs. See answer 4 below. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Entering 9th grade students who are identified ELL are given mentors (ELL or otherwise) to help transition them to high school. All students are also assigned to an adult advisor to help with academic advisement for the year, and a student advisory group that supports them throughout all of high school. The professional development plan for all ELL personnel at our school will entail in-house (regarding new changes as per Part 154) and best practices regarding ELL instruction, and outside PD as advertised by the Office of English Language Learners. All ELL personnel, including all teachers at PACE, engage in a weekly 80 minute PD where instructional strategies and current concerns regarding different student populations are discussed and practiced. Some resources used throughout this time are our teachers’ own best practices, and materials provided by the instructional coaches, and school leadership. Our school-wide learning outcomes are directly aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. In collaboration with the ELL network liaison or equivalent representative, principal, and ELL personnel, PDs are designed to speak specifically on how the ELL population can reach grade level CCLS standards and access content within a heterogeneous classroom. To support all teachers of ELLs, PD is designed to speak to speak to the diversity within the ELL population within the context of diversity as a whole school, and how to best support ELLs in the classroom. Our professional development is also designed with a focus around supporting all of our diverse learners, including ESL strategies and ELL assessments, as well as curriculum and instructional planning for so that all learners can be successful. Records are maintained with our school secretary and instructional cabinet. All teachers are allowed to take their additional PD courses for free at Pace University. Classes in curriculum development, ESL instruction as well as Special Education theory are taken by our ESL and othe teachers as part of our professional development strand at PACE. 8  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Annual individual meetings are held with committee members at the beginning of each school year to discuss goals and progress from the previous year. Additionally, two student-led conferences are held annually. We have multilingual staff who provide translation services in Cantonese, Spanish, Mandarin, and English. We also collaborate with a co-located school for Arabic and Bengali translation services. Any languages we are unable to translate with in-house staff, we work with the DOE translation and interpretation unit for support. Records of all parent meetings and individual meetings and outreach are maintained with the principal and secretarial staff (this also answers #2 below). 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We have an active Parent Association with a few ELL parents who attend PACE functions. All events and meetings have Spanish and Chinese translators. Parents volunteer at Open Houses and with student recruitment, schoolwide cultural events, Parent Association meetings and workshops, as well as the annual Parent Association-sponsored Talent Show. See answer #1 for further translation information. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Eric Glatz, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PACE HIGH SCHOOL School DBN: 02M290 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) ERIC GLATZ Title Principal Michael Sowiski Assistant Principal NA Parent Coordinator Mary Dreyfus ENL/Bilingual Teacher Arelis Forty Parent David Rohlfing Teacher/Subject Area NA NA NA Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Jazmin Montes School Counselor Marisol Rosales NA NA NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 8/01/17 8/01/17 1/1/01 8/01/17 8/01/17 8/01/17 9/15/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 8/01/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M298 School Name: PACE High School Superintendent: 02 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Principal and/or grade-level team leader meets with every incoming student and their parents who are identified as needing ELL/ESL support. The entrance interview allows us to identify additional supports such as translation services as well as additional programs for students who need more support in language acquisition. A home language report is also generated. School personnel are able to translate Chinese (multiple dialects), Spanish, French, and ASL. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language PACE High School needs written and oral translations in Spanish and Chinese. We also need oral translation services in Bengali, Haitian Creolo (we contract translation services). Other languages which are represented in our home language reports have one parent in the home able to speak and read in English. A summary of our translation and oral interpretation needs are conveyed to the school community via grade-level meetings and PA announcements. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Family newsletters, notices regarding promotion in doubt, notices about exams. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 3  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Most oral interpretation needs are covered through in-house staff members during school-wide meetings and Student Conferences. We also utilize DOE translation services (in person or by phone). We have assisted listening devices for students and parents needing hearing devices for meetings and conferecnes. We have utilized ASL translation services for our students and parents needing ASL interpretation as well. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All parents receive copied of the Parents Bill of Rights, which additionally is posted in the main office reception area. Welcome posters greet families at the entrance and our main office, and all office personnel have Language ID guides and Parents' Guide to Language Access readily available. All documents are provided to all staff members prior to parent engagement events repeatedly throughout the school year. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 4  School leadership and the Parent Association will gather feedback from parent outreach and assess for improvement. 5 
