2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M303 School Name: FACING HISTORY SCHOOL, THE Principal: DANA PANAGOT 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Facing History School 02M303 333627 9-12 School Number (DBN): 525 West 50 th Street, NY NY 10019 212-757-2680 212-757-2156 Phone Number: Fax: Kristina Wylie Colmenares kwylie@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 02 Email Address: Dana Panagot Leonora Stein Alicia Torres Dana Panagot Rita Laguer JanielCarrasco Leonardo Perez Mike Jones District Information Kathy Pelles Superintendent: 335 Adams St., Room 506,Brooklyn NY 11201 Superintendent’s Office Address: kpelles@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 917.861.1095 Phone Number: 718-923-5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Affinity Support Center Executive Director: Alexandra Anormaliza   Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street Brooklyn NY 11201, 6th Floor Executive Director’s Email Address: AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov (718)-935-5618 718-935-5941 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dana Panagot Daniel Perkowski Alicia Torres - Casey Hill JanielCarrasco Leonardo Perez Mike Jones Monique Scott CaridadGarcia Elizabeth Pino *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ UFT   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Colleen Burge ChristianRamos Miriam Perez Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At FHS, our mission is to graduate students who are: a) lifelong learners with the skills and knowledge for academic and professional success and b) prepared for the responsibilities of being active, thoughtful participants and leaders in a democratic society. We believe that our relevant, academically rigorous program and the supportive, caring structures we have in place make us more than just an excellent school, but an excellent learning community. With the guidance of our lead partner, Facing History and Ourselves, we ask our students to go on a four-year journey to   help prepare them for the ethical and moral decisions of adulthood. Our school’s activities, structure, and curricula are centered around four themes: Identity, Caring and Responsibility, Decision-Making, and Choosing to Participate. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. As a member of The New York Performance Standards Consortium (www.performanceassessment.org) we are part of a coalition of high schools across New York State who has pioneered the creation of educational communities synonymous with active student learning, exemplary professional development and innovative curriculum and teaching strategies for 21st century students. We have devised a system of assessment, which consists of eight components including alignment with state standards, professional development, external review, and formative and summative data. Student work is documented to show their work meets and exceeds New York State Regents standards through a system of rigorous commencement-level performance-based assessment tasks. Performance on these tasks is reflected on student transcripts and results are used for college admission. The tasks require students to demonstrate accomplishment in analytical thinking, reading comprehension, research and writing skills, the application of mathematical computation and problem-solving skills, computer technology, the utilization of the scientific method in undertaking science research, appreciation of and performance skills in the arts, service learning and school to career skills. Experts external to the schools, from universities and the business world, participate in reviews of student work. By using a performance-based assessment system, we insist that assessment must not stand apart, but be continually incorporated into the day-to-day work, and schooling, of every student. For this reason, we use multiple strategies to assess students. In conjunction with our work with our Lead Partner, Facing History and Ourselves, as well as the NY State Performance standards consortium, we also have a strong partnership with Urban Arts Partnership (UAP). We have an integrated arts program that deepens the intellectual rigor and the personal connections across the disciplines. Our arts partner, Urban Arts Partnership (UAP), provides artist-teachers who provide our independent studio arts program but also team teach with teachers in every team and every department, to build capacity around the arts, As a result, students have the opportunity to use art as a way of expressing what they have learned both within their core content classes as well as in various independent art programs throughout the day. One current success we have as a school is our distributive leadership model. We have strategically structured the school in a way that builds teacher capacity, models and demands collaboration, and ensures stakeholders have a voice in our school processes and procedures. Another current success as a school is around our work with the Layered Curriculum model in all classes and all CCLS aligned units that allows for student choice, differentiation, multiple entry points and higher order thinking in order to support student to student discussion, higher order questions and increased student engagement. The creator of Layered Curriculum, Kathie Nunley, visits our school twice a year to support teachers in implementation through PD, small group meetings, classroom observations and one-on-one coaching. Students then demonstrate their learning as they present their work in either portfolios (round table group presentations) or panels (one student in front of a panel of staff, students and community members). Last year we also had the most after school activities and student participation in the 12 years we have been open. Working with our partner, Urban Arts Partnership, we are strengthening our after school programs to include more clubs and studio art classes to create stronger community. 0  We have two major teacher-facilitated committees that support our distributive leadership model: The Shared Leadership and Implementation Committee and The Facing Ourselves Committee (FOC). SLIC consists of 10 teachers (2 per department), the UFT chapter leader and a member of Administration and helps to plan professional development, revise curriculum and align to CCLS, create peer observation template, support department in peer observations and discuss outcomes and findings based on student engagement. FOC consists of a social worker, a member from our Lead Partner, Facing History and Ourselves, and 7 teachers (at least 1 per department). Their focus is to pinpoint the values that make FHS unique, and wrestle with those ideas as they connect to our own lives. With an additional focus on staff development, we will take those ideas and develop ways to engage the staff community at large in discussion, and bring these ideas to our students in advisory, curriculum and through school-wide programming. Teachers should be interested in a combination of their own learning, in leadership development, and in focusing on the mission of FHS. For the past three years, our school is part of PROSE, a new initiative created by Chancellor Farina, where we created our own teacher evaluation system in collaboration with the Consortium. Our current challenges as a school are our attendance rates and supporting our high need student population academically, socially and emotionally. Our attendance averages for the past few years were as follows:       SY 2017-2018: 83.0% SY 2016-2017: 83.3% SY 2015-2016: 83.0% SY 2014-2015: 83.0% SY 2013-2014: 80.74 SY 2012-2013: 80.16 Our current attendance average: 83.0% We realize this is a huge area we need to focus on as a low overall attendance affects student promotion and graduation. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. For previous 2017-2018 school year, of the 380 students currently on register, we have the following percentages of ELL and SPED students:  % ELL: 22%  % Sped: 24% The large majority of our students also come to us at Level 1 and 2 in both Math and English, so we have a high need student population. The academic, behavioral and social-emotional needs that our students possess often create additional barriers when it comes to student success. Once we have our finalized register for the 2016-2017 school year we will be able to identify what our student needs are. 1  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Progress: Collaborative Teachers - This year we spent a lot of professional development time in inquiry groups, having teacher-led professional development and also engaging in best practice shares. We want to continue to strengthen this practice and leverage more departmental collaboration looking at student and teacher work and revising curriculum to create more rigorous instruction. We also transitioned from paper to digital PBATs this year using Google Classroom, allowing for more streamlined and timely feedback. Focus: Rigorous Instruction - In both PPOs we received similar feedback - simplify our instructional focus and increase cognitive engagement in the classroom. This is feedback we have received over the last couple of years and have set goals to push this practice further in the upcoming school year using a variety of supports, including curricular models from other consortium schools, the IA document created by the Consortium and re-aligning each department's 9-12 scope and sequence to the skills needed to successfully complete the PBAT. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M303 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 382 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 13 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 3 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 2 School Composition (2017-18) 81.0% % Attendance Rate 80.1% % Reduced Lunch 14.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 70.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.12 6% 32% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 71% 0% 66.3% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A YES No N/A 123 150 80.7% 1.0% 23.3% 24.6% 1.3% 1.6% 4 21% 8.9 N/A N/A 10% 0% 73.6% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Overall, we have worked collaboratively as a school in this Capacity Framework Element with our adoption of Kathie Nunley’s Layered Curriculum model and focus on revising curriculum to meet the CCLS. This past year, we moved all of our PBATs online through Google Classroom and students were able to access real-time feedback from paper readers therefore strengthening the revision process. Using the online platform made it easier to track submission rates, teacher feedback and student revision. From our most recent PPO, we received feedback on the following two areas: Fall Review: Areas of Focus (Effective or Highly Effective)  Curriculum 1.1 Principal engages teachers in a process of ensuring that curricula are Common Core and PBAT aligned. Continue to support teachers in their development of inquiry based projects that allow student voice, student choice and student independence. Pedagogy 1.2 Principal articulates the core beliefs about teacher and learning to the school community and promotes investment in those beliefs through individual coaching and school wide professional development. An AP statistics class was conducted asynchronously. Students were working independently. Teacher needs build a routine for social learning which would increase teacher and peer feedback. A 12th grade Neuroscience class was critiquing a case study with a view to understanding when designing an experiment. Class was well organized and clear. A geometry class was using a variety of materials to determine if triangles were congruent. An Algebra ICT class had an essential question, but class was very basic and it was unclear if there was a project that the class was moving toward. An 11th grade Living Environment class on food webs was superficial. An 11th grade ICT class was writing essays on “Raisin in the Sun.” Previously they had read “Their Eyes Were Watching God.” Most students were using an evidence note taker to gather evidence for an essay. Three students were doing “more advanced work.” More differentiation in scaffolding would have been 4  useful. Principal and Admin team are aware of the advances and gaps in teacher practice and have a solid idea of next steps. Continue to work with teachers individually and collectively to plan projects and lessons that allow students to grapple with ideas, concepts and independence. Next Steps Instruction: Students experience their education as a lived experience in the classroom. Continue to focus on working with teachers to maximize opportunities for learning in the classroom. Often this requires a close examination of teacher practices and impact on students as enacted in each individual classroom. Your teacher coach should continue to coach and work with teachers towards a rich instructional experience. The further you move from the classroom, the less impact that you have. Spring Review: Areas of Focus (Effective or Highly Effective) 1.1 The Principal should continue to build coherence in the alignment of curricula and embedded tasks to PBAT Graduation Standards that consistently promote the development of college and career readiness skills so that all learners are cognitively engaged. Students did report that they could be challenged more. In the student panel, they said the work is sometimes too easy and they wished that teachers would push them more. Classes we visited offered students choice: differentiated task, various methods for working or solving problems, different layers of curriculum. In math class, method and strategies were emphasized over just getting the correct answer. 1.2 The Principal should continue to strengthen teacher pedagogy so that across the vast majority of classrooms, student work products and discussions reflect high levels of student thinking, participation, and ownership. Math classes have adopted a “One Problem Wednesday” problem solving approach, where students work on longer, more complex problems for a full period. There is a shift form formulas to problem solving. Students were solving systems of equations to locate a position on a map, solving one of a set of differentiated geometry tasks, analysing data sets and generating questions. The math department has grown during this last year. Kudos on that progress. Next Steps: Continue to work on focusing the learning targets (not task based like “I can complete”) to make them skill-based (something that can be taught and practiced). Continue to work with teachers on strategies for engagement, including pacing, purposeful grouping and clear purpose for daily lessons. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5  By June 2019, 80% of teachers will receive an overall effective for Danielson Competency 1e, Designing Coherent Instruction, and have collaboratively created curriculum samples that aligned to the school's instructional focus, core values and mission. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will engaged in year-long professional development aligned to school's instructional focus, core values and mission that is designed by teacher leaders in the school's Instructional Focus Group, CREAD (Culturally Responsive Educators of the African Diaspora, and our Lead Partner, Facing History and Ourselves. Admin will offer informal walkthrough feedback to all teachers at least once a month specifically aligned to school's instructional focus. Additionally, members of the school's Instructional Focus Group (one member from each department that meets once a week for 2 hours to give feedback on curriculum and plan PD aligned to school's instructional focus)will also provide walk through feedback as peer support aligned to school's instructional focus. Danielson Competency 1e will be a school-wide focus area for the Structured Review Process (as a PROSE school) and teaches will provide curriculum samples as part of their end of year SRP portfolio. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Admin and teacher leaders in Instructional Focus Group. All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Teachers will present curriculum samples and evidence of student engagement to department members, students and parents for critical feedback. All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Admin/Instructional Focus Group 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers, administrators and parent coordinator will provide parents with Syllabi that includes instructional focus and core values at orientation, curriculum night, parent teacher nights and community schools forum. Parents will be invited to department meetings where teachers are presenting curriculum and evidence of student engagement for feedback. 7  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Administration will spend the summer meeting with CSD, parent coordinator, representatives from CREAD, and our Facing History Liaison in order to create the year-long PD calendar. 2. Teacher leaders will meet in September as part of the Instructional Focus Group every Tuesday from 3:15-5:15 for per session. 3. Administration will renew Teachboost subscription where teachers set goals and receive informal and walkthough feedback aligned the NYC MOTP 8. 4. Administration as well as members of IFG will conduct at least 1 walkthough of every teacher and provide informal feedback specific to instructional focus at least once a month. 5. Administration will divide staff and each serve as an "admin coach" to support teachers through the SRP 6. process. IFG and Administration will make a schedule for staff to present curriculum and evidence of student engagement during department meets and share this information with parents via newsletters and the website and invite them to attend. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 70% of the staff will have received an effective in 1e at least one informal or formal evaluation according to reports through teachboost. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will use reports from Teachboost Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to previous feedback from our PPO visit, we received the following feedback: Areas of Celebration from Fall PP0 Learning Environment 1.4 Principal leads the school in the implementation of comprehensive strategies that promote a safe climate and the personal and academic growth of students. School has a school-wide advisory schedule, curriculum based on grade level and the practice of guided discipline. In addition, the school supports Mindfulness, and works with Little Flower Yoga. School is working with Leadership Project on parent workshops. School is a Community School with Urban Arts. Areas of Celebration from Spring PPO  1.4 The Principal leads the implementation of comprehensive strategies that promote a safe climate and the personal and academic growth of students. The students are well known and the administrative team takes care to be everywhere. When they walk together down the halls, everyone either scatters or comes over to greet them. It is a safe, caring learning environment. Additionally, according to our School Quality Snapshot for 2016-2017, we scored Excellent in the following elements: Supportive Environment and Trust. Overall, supportive environment is an area of strength for us. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 9  By June 2019, 95% of 21st enrolled students will participate in 90 hours of programming according to data provided by YouthServices reports. 0 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Working with our CBO, our CSD will help create a calendar of before, during and after school activities that align with 21st Century/Community schools Grant expectations and guidelines All students enrolled in 21st century programs Admin and 21 st C Site Coordinators September 2018 and February 2019 NA NA NA Admin and CSD will meet weekly to review student enrollment data, club attendance numbers and overall attendance All students enrolled in 21st century programs September 2018 – June 2019 Admin and CSD; support from Program Manager, Office of Community Schools NA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement NA NA NA How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Provide data and club information to parents at Parent/Teacher nights. Have a section on the website dedicated to 21st C activities. Include all events on quarterly parent newsletter. PTA and SLT will hold 12 parent workshops during the course of the year and invite parents to all. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Grant money provides Community Resource Director 2. Grant money provides studio artists for 3 integrations and 2 after school programs using Urban Arts Partnership Teaching Artists; schedule is created by by August 2018 1 3. Grant money provides per session for clubs that start in October 2018 4. Club success evaluated by end of semester; clubs start again in February 2019 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 80% of students have participated in 45 hours or more of 21st Century Programming according to YouthServices data reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use reports from YouthServices.net Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Last year, our instructional focus was on cognitive engagement and differentiation. In order to reach towards our school’s mission: to create lifelong learners and individuals who are active, thoughtful participants in a democratic society, our students need to be active, critical thinkers. We have made some progress in this work as indicated by our most recent PPOs (see below) , but we have also received feedback that the "so what" - the connection to why the learning is important, is often missing from the lessons. Also, we observed this year many more students who did not feel safe in the classroom setting and therefore felt they could not learn or want to be part of the classroom community. This trend is confirmed in our 2016-2017 School Quality Review, where we noticed that our scores decreased in the domain of "supportive environment." Especially concerning was that "58% of students say that teachers support them when they are upset (City: 49%)" which is a 4% decrease from the previous year. This past year, all admin and teachers began work with CREAD (Culturally Responsive Educators of the African Diaspora) to help teachers think about creating more culturally responsive pedagogy, with the hopes of including more student voice in the classroom and curriculum. Also key stakeholders in the school (admin, students and teachers) have been attending trainings in implementing Restorative Justice and building a more restorative culture. Additionally, in order to reach our mission, we also need to grow our classroom cultures and school culture. All people and spaces (systems, structures, curriculum, etc.) in our school need to foster thinking, learning, and and democracy in order to reach our mission, which is why were are on a path towards becoming a restorative justice school. Restorative justice is not only about how we discipline students; restorative justice philosophy, theory, and practice is to ensure greater equity and stronger democracy for all people in a community. And in order to make this shift in our school community, all staff first need to be trained in Tier 1 Restorative Justice Practices. Fall PPO by Superintendent: Spring PPO:  1.2 The Principal should continue to strengthen teacher pedagogy so that across the vast majority of classrooms, student work products and discussions reflect high levels of student thinking, participation, and ownership. Math classes have adopted a “One Problem Wednesday” problem solving approach, where students work on longer, more complex problems for a full period. There is a shift form formulas to problem solving. Students were solving systems of equations to locate a position on a map, solving one of a 3 set of differentiated geometry tasks, analysing data sets and generating questions. The math department has grown during this last year. Kudos on that progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will be trained in and participate in Restorative Circles and Tier 1 training in Restorative Justice practices. 4 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Admin, key students and key teacher leaders All staff Summer 2018 Admin Admin and teacher leaders Admin September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration, self-selected students and teacher leaders will be trained in Tier 1 Restorative Circles and Practices All staff will participate in Restorative Circles for the first 45 minutes of every Wednesday staff meeting. The circles will be lead by teacher leaders and occasionally students. All staff will be expected to attend a Tier 1 training offered by the Affinity Group during the year. Additionally, we will offer on site-PD during our staff PD times to support the outside training. All staff n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement n/a n/a How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our parent coordinator will be trained in restorative circles and we will offer parents the opportunity to either be trained in or participate in circles during parent/teacher nights and PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. We will pay coverages using Title 1 funds for staff attending Tier 1 trainings 2. We will use Title 1 funds to host Tyler Brewster from Peer Connect to provide on-site PD to support Restorative work at the school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 5  X C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all staff have either attended and or/signed up for a Tier 1 Training. By February 2019, all staff will have completed a survey to gauge their experience and understanding of Tier 1 practices. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Google form data for PD attendance/registration and for survey results. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, we received an excellent in "effective school leadership." However, one aspect of student achievement that has historically been a struggle for is us our school-wide attendance. For the 2016-2017 school year, we had 53% of our students listed as "Chronically Absent" (in comparison with a city-wide average of 31%). This is an increase of 6% in chronic absenteeism from the previous year. We believe that part of school leadership is creating an environment that supports students towards graduation and want to continue pushing ourselves to focus on attendance as this is a key component in student success and promotion. We know that if we want to increase student achievement and our graduation rate, we need to focus on getting students to school. Therefore, this year we are committed to increasing our yearly attendance rate. Our attendance rates for the past few years has been the following:       SY 2017-2018: 82.3% SY 2016-2017: 82.0% SY 2015-2016: 83.0% SY 2014-2015: 83.0% SY 2013-2014: 80.74 SY 2012-2013: 80.16 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administration will work with student leaders, teacher leaders and our CBO, Urban Arts Partnership, to implement systems and structures and strengthen school-wide practices to increase student engagement, resulting in an increase of school-wide attendance to 85%. 7 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Admin (and then Committee) Teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Admin (and then Committee) Admin and parent coordinator Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration will create and facilitate an attendance committee that meets bi-weekly to analyze attendance data, create best practices and turnkey practices and incentives to staff. This committee will also decide upon and implement attendance incentives like movie tickets and trips for students who increase their attendance. Administration will renew and continue to train teachers in use of Skedula/Pupil Path system that accurately records interventions teachers have done and can aggregate by type of intervention – including attendance. Teachers will receive professional development in supporting students socio-emotional growth from the following sources: Teachers  Advisory curriculum PDs (Facing Ourselves Committee)  Little Flower Yoga PDs - mindfulness and student engagement  Restorative Justice/Tier 1 trainings Administration will meet bi-weekly with 21st century coordinators to increase after school activities and academic interventions to help students feel a part of the larger school community and successful both academically and socio-emotionally. _________________________________________________ Attendance Committee will focus on chronic absenteeism through implementation of a program called "success mentors" that will pair identified students with teacher/staff mentors to increase attendance. Students ________ Students who are chronically absent September 2018-June 2019 21 st Century site-coordinators ________ September 2018-June 2019 _______ Admin and Attendance Committee. 8  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Advisors will reach out and document calls to parents. Success mentors will also provide outreach to parents. Parents will receive updates about student attendance at all parent/teacher events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Per session and/or coverage for attendance committee as well as success mentors 2. Per session for 21st century after school activities and site-coordinators 3. SLT stipend for parent and teacher members. 4. Per session: Members of the Facing Ourselves Committee work to create Advisory curriculum and then create staff PD to support implementation of advisory curriculum. 5. OTPS: Attendance committee will decide upon a series of attendance incentives for students that may include pizza parties, movie tickets and school trips – including fun trips and college trips. 6. Purchase of Skedula/Pupil Path 7. Purchase of 4 full staff mindfulness/yoga workshops for staff 8. Purchase of 20 hours of support from a licensed yoga teacher Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the attendance committee will meet to analyze school attendance data including monthly, period attendance and YTD as well as parent outreach conducted by teachers to determine what next steps are needed to meet goals. By February 2019, the 21st Century Site Coordinator will track and analyze semester 1 attendance in clubs and work with attendance committee on analyzing patterns of student attendance. By February 2019, the attendance committee will look at attendance rate of students identified for the "Success Mentors" program to see if this program model has had a positive impact on individual chronic absenteeism. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Visions Data Sorter and ATS attendance reports 9  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We received the following feedback from our most recent 2016-2017 school survey: 87% responded positively to question about strong Family-Community Ties. Of the 6 elements of the Framework for Great Schools, we scored the lowest in this category - only 2 percentage points above the Manhattan Average and 3 percentage points above the city average. Like attendance, parent engagement has consistently been a struggle for us. We want to continue to focus on creating stronger family and community ties and are this year are going to leverage areas of strength - our bi-lingual parent Coordinator and our relationship with our CBO, Urban Arts Partnership, in order to create parent workshops that would create a strong learning community that involves more parents. We have many resources/partnerships at the school to support student and family social and emotional health, including our 3 social workers, a recently added CATCH health program, services provided by Peer Health Exchange and Project Stay as well as our work with Urban Arts Partnership. These partnerships help support students and families by locating outside organizations and resources to better support students (and their families’) socio-emotional needs. This past year we also purchased a school-wide grading policy and use Skedula/Pupil Path so parents can log in and see grades and email teachers at their convenience. However, we feel that before we add additional partnerships, our first priority is to engage parents/guardians in our school community. We need to know about our student’s families before we can figure out what services to provide and additional partnerships to add. So our focus for this year is to strengthen our relationship with our parents by using our strong partnership with Urban Arts to facilitate workshops to increase parental engagement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will develop a more collaborative partnership with families and community organizations, resulting in at our parent coordinator working with our SLT and our CBO, Urban Arts, to increase parent involvement so that at least 75% of our students have a parent come to at least one school event for the 2018-2019 school year. 1  2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent Coordinator will work with CBO to create parent Newsletter to go out 4x a year. SLT will do outreach to parents for all parent workshop events; SLT will also collect parent cell phones to text reminders about upcoming events. All parents All parents COSA will work with Parent Coordinator to increase student and parent involvement in school-wide events, including parent/teacher night. All parents/All students Advisors will reach out to parents inviting them to every student event for the school year All advisors/All parents Admin and Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator and SLT COSA, PC and Admin Advisors and Admin September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Outreach at beginning of year; increased personal outreach by Parent Coordinator and SLT; Text message Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Stipend for SLT   21st century grant money for parent workshops  210 hours of per session for teachers on the Facing Ourselves Committee  Purchase of Skedula/Pupil Path   Translation of school handbook, mailings and key school documents or programs for families into Spanish  Postage for mailing  Two ride metro cards for parents who attend school for conferences or events. Supplies needed for meetings: reams of paper, ink/toner, envelopes Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 3  C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the SLT will analyze the following data - parent attendance at a school event and the amount of parents that have created a PupilPath account and create next steps to meet school goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent participation, parent feedback and School Survey Results. Additionally we can look at SLT outreach data through our call log database (VAN) provided through community schools. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ELL Data Sped Data 9 th or 10 th grade student Credit accumulation Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Skills based English class Special Ed teacher pull out for skills assessment and reading and writing extra help Achieve 3000 ELA Regents Scores/PBATprogress Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group During the school day Small group, one to one After-school/Saturday class Full class After-school/Saturday class Mathematics 8 th grade math data; 9 th grade diagnostic Skills based additional math class Science Sped Data Credit accumulation Teacher observational data; Skedula Credit accumulation Special Ed teacher pull out for skills assessment and reading and writing extra help Credit Recovery Special Ed teacher pull out for skills assessment and reading and writing extra help Credit Recovery Small group During the school day Small group, one to one After-school/Saturday class After-school/Saturday class Small group, one to one After-school/Saturday class During the school day After-school/Saturday class 5  Social Studies Teacher observational data; Skedula Credit accumulation At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) IEPs and teacher observational data Attendance Data Small group, one to one After-school/Saturday class During the school day After-school/Saturday class Small group, one to one During the school day Small Group Special Ed teacher pull out for skills assessment and reading and writing extra help Credit Recovery Mandated students to meet with Social Workers, School Psychologist per IEP I-connect peer mentoring group 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 34 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We have a team of 2 social workers and 1 guidance counselor who works with the families to locate outside resources. We also provide students in STH with "care packages" that include school uniform shirts, pants, a sweatshirt and shoes when necessary as well as additional school supplies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment: teachers are recruited and hired for the specific content area of vacancy. We also look for teachers who may be dual certified in either Special Education, ESL or Bilingual education as well as a content due to our high percentage of students with IEPs and English Language Learners. Retention: Upon starting employment at Facing History regardless of years teaching, all new to FHS teachers received new teacher orientation; participate in additional new teachers check in meetings both in groups and one-on one with Administration. All new to FHS teachers receive a veteran FHS teacher mentor to support with understanding culture, policies and procedures of the school. All teachers attend a weekly staff meeting where professional development is focus11 ed around the needs of the school and the teachers including effective lesson planning, increase student engagement, differentiation, UDL and student learning profiles, incorporating questioning and discussion techniques, effective curriculum development to meet the needs of our students. As well teacher attend the three citywide PD days outside of the school and teachers attend content specific PD outside of the school throughout the year. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 1. All administrators and key staff members will attend network meetings, especially those regarding instructional outcomes and CCLS. 2. Our Curriculum Development Team meets every Monday to review, give feedback on and revise curriculum, share best practices and set department agendas based on curricular alignment to the CCLS. 3. Here is an overview of our Professional Development Draft for the 2016.2017 school year, including 11 workshops on curriculum and CCLS: 9  8 workshops - Advisory Topics: Beginning of year / Building Advisory community Common Culture Unit #1 -Common Culture Unit #2 -Common Culture Unit #3 -Common Culture Unit #4 -Planning time -Transitions in the year (holidays, presentation times, end of year) 4 workshops - Adult development and team building Topics: -Schoolwide theme: Ubuntu -Team-building (openers, reflective activities, readings) -Adult topics/discussions relevant to Common Culture unit #1 -Adult topics/discussions relevant to Common Culture unit #2 -Adult topics/discussions relevant to Common Culture unit #3 -Adult topics/discussions relevant to Common Culture unit #4 8 workshops - Building a Restorative Culture and Tier 1 trainings: Topics: - FHS Core Values (should be the anchor for all of these workshops) - Tier 1 Common practices/policies (what’s a teacher’s responsibility, what’s the dean’s, advisors, admin) -Reflective Classroom -Tier 1 circle training Resources: 0  Getting Classroom Management RIGHT: Guided Discipline and Personalized Support in Secondary Schools by Carol Miller Lieber How Children Succeed by Paul Tough Circle Forward: Building a Restorative School Community: Carolyn Boyes-Watson & Kay Pranis 11 workshops - Curriculum / Pedagogy that Supports all Students using Danielson focus areas Topics: -Diagnostics/Assessments -Layered curriculum best practices (inquiry group) -Standards based -Inquiry/action research focused on schoolwide goals/Instructional Focus (use collaborative inquiry cycle below as a structure/model) -Department reads -College readiness -(after Cycle 3 credit recovery, departments should meet to create proposal for class preferences and rationale for why each person should teach proposed class; Admin will review) -Reflective Classroom (FH) Resources: Collaborative Inquiry Cycle: http://www.educationsector.org/sites/default/files/image/Figure1_0.jpg Citywide Instructional Expectations: http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/CommonCoreLibrary/About/InstructionalExpectations/default.htm Common Core Library: http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/CommonCoreLibrary/TasksUnitsStudentWork/default.htm College and Career Readiness Benchmarks: http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/CommonCoreLibrary/A bout/CCR/default.htm Common Core Teacher Team Resources: http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/CommonCoreLibrary/ProfessionalLearning/ResourcesforTeacherTeams/default.htm Common Core for SWD: 1  http://nichcy.org/schools-administrators/commoncore 2 workshops/meeting times - Panel/PBAT Presentations -March -May 5 workshops - Teacher Effectiveness/Advance/Framework for Teaching Topics/Format: -Admin expectations for observations (connected to staff learning topics, schoolwide goals) -Create individual Teacher Learning Plans (on ARIS Learn) -Danielson study groups -Peer observations -Teacher Portfolio -ARIS Learn modules Resources: ARIS Learn modules -Teacher Learning Plan (click here for a sample plan) -Learning Opportunities for each domain of Danielson (go to arisnyc.org , log in, then click on the Learn tab) -Planning and Preparation -Classroom Environment -Instruction -Professional Responsibilities Danielson’s Framework for Teaching: http://schools.nyc.gov/Offices/TeacherEffectiveness/For+E ducators /Framework/default.htm 10 workshops - Academies working together to support student growth Topics: 2  -Data analysis around schoolwide goals / graduation rate / academy benchmarks (student work, scholarship reports, progress towards promotion) -Individualized support / Interventions/ “Kid talk” protocols -Common classroom structures/policies to support student success -SpEd support -ELL support Resources: Collaborative Inquiry Cycle: http://www.educationsector.org/sites/default/files/image/Figure1_0.jpg Special Education Reform: http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/SpecialEducation/default.htm 4 workshop/meeting times - Celebrations -Beginning of year barbecue -Thanksgiving -Winter holiday -End of year Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 3  4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. As a member of the New York State Performance Standards Consortium, we only have to give the ELA Regents and have historically designed our own interim and formative assessment measures in conjunction with feedback from the consortium. Currently, we have a group called the Curriculum Development Team (consisting of 10 teachers (2 per department), the UFT chapter leader and a member of Administration) to support the curriculum work and make decisions on assessments. Department grade teams meet bi-weekly to create, review, revise and get feedback on student assessments. We also had all of our students take the Performance Series diagnostic in Algebra, ELA and Reading in October to give a baseline skill assessment. They will take the performance test again in the spring semester. This data will be used to inform curriculum. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 252,299.00 0 12,366.00 0 3065946.00 x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) NEED TO ADD NEED TO ADD NEED TO ADD 4  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 5  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Facing History School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The Facing History School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 7  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 8  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Facing History School in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 9  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 0  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 1  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 2  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Utilizing a holistic “whole child” approach, we believe a student’s academic functioning is tied to their social-emotional functioning. We have 3 social workers, one guidance counselor and social work interns provide supportive counseling services (group and individual) that addresses the child well-being. Some of the work that they do with students include emotion regulation, development of coping skills/coping strategies, goal planning and setting, identity development, advocacy, case management, and more. This work has allowed students to spend more valuable time in the classroom learning. We also have a comprehensive advisory program where each student is a member of an advisory with the same advisor for all 4 years. Advisory meets 5 days a week for a class period and includes curriculum on health and healthy relationships, social-emotional supports, academic conferencing, and activities/curriculum designed by teachers in conjunction with our lead partner, Facing History and Ourselves that examines social justice issues that resonate with our students. We believe this socio-emotional support has had a direct impact on recent increases in graduation. In 2011, our graduation rate was 51%. Recent additions of a guidance counselor, re-structuring the schedule so that advisory meets 5 times a week and the addition of more studio arts classes, arts integrations as well as after school activities and academic support (provided through the 21st century/Community Schools grant) has helped our graduation rate reach a high of 76% this past 2016-2017 school year. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Our goals are: Goal 1: By June 2018, 95% of 21st enrolled students will participate in 90 hours of programming by the end of the school year. Goal 2: By June 2017, administration will work with student leaders, teacher leaders and our CBO, Urban Arts Partnership, to implement systems and structures and strengthen school-wide practices to increase student engagement, resulting in an increase of school-wide attendance to 85%. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Our student population is on average 25% Special Education students and 25% English Language Learners. 4  Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Lead CBO Lead CBO/School Lead CBO Target Population Students identified as “Chronically Absent” incoming 9th graders w/ below 80% attendance the previous school year School-wide Lead CBO Student with social-emotional challenges Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Attendance Supports- success mentors Attendance Supports- success mentors Quarterly attendance initiatives to recognize students with improved attendance; school-wide initiatives and challenges to incentivize great attendance Health and Wellness - Provide supportive counseling to students experiencing social emotional challenges By Oct 2018, Success Mentors will create and implement attendance improvement for identified chronically absent students. By June 2018, 80% of the targeted students will have missed 1 fewer days per month than the previous year. To end the 2017-18 year with a 1% increase in our cumulative attendance by being more strategic in our attendance initiatives To end the 2017-18 year with a 1% increase in our cumulative attendance by being more strategic in our attendance initiatives To develop better instruments/tools to track the progress/growth of our students’ social-emotional functioning by October 2017; for at least 65% of our students receiving supportive counseling to improve their social-emotional Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 5 - Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century X C4E SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 1. We already have a CS director hired. 2. Students experiencing social-emotional challenges will be referred to the SWAG department using a google-based referral form for supportive counseling by advisors and guidance counselors. Services may short or long-term and may include skills-based and supportive groups (bereavement, college readiness, motivation to graduation, etc) and individual counseling. The different format and modalities ensures that the right services are provided to the rights students at the right time. After-school services will be coordinated with instructional school-day programming based on Regents pass rate data. The additional class will be co-taught by an English teacher and a UA teaching artist. 3. We will continue to develop parent leaders in by our CS/SLT meetings to actively include them in the decision-making process and give them opportunities to be strong advocates for their children. Our Parent Coordinator will work closely with the CS Director to create workshops and inform/engage parents. 6  4. We will implement the use of the New Visions Data Sorter in our attendance meetings. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. Partners: Urban Arts Partnership CS Team: Dana Panagot, Tiffany Brown, Rita Laguer and members of the SLT. CS meeting will be incorporated into School Leadership Team meetings as the goals of both are the same and to best maximize everyone’s times. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. All resources available Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2017-June 2018 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 7  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The ELL population in our school includes mostly long term ELLs and developing ELLs who need additional supports to increase achievement in core content areas such as ELA and Math. Our Title III program will include ENL/Math and ENL/ELA Enrichment classes. Once students have been identified for each program, parent notification letters will be mailed to families, as well as one on one conferences with students to explain the program and its benefits. Attendance records will be maintained for each program through a sign in sheet. ENL Math After School Enrichment Program Students attend an after-school supplemental ELL program on Tuesday/Thursday from 3:00-4:00pm. We will target students who currently have a grade math between 55% and 75%. ELLS at all proficiency levels need additional math support which needs to be complimented with English language support. This program will help students develop the necessary skills to increase their achievement in math class along with math projects as well as improving their scores on the NYSESLAT. Therefore, the program will be co-led by a math certified teacher and an ENL teacher. The program will run from October 4, 2018 - May 30, 2019. Each teacher providing the direct instruction will teach 25 weeks throughout the year. We will purchase six Chomebooks to support the work for this program including accessing online mathematical resources such as Kahn Academy, for research, academic writing and other online resources . This extra targeted ELL instruction support provides enrichment and support through scaffolding the supplementing the work the students are doing in the daily math classes to help them understand the assignments, to provide any additional scaffolding and a provides opportunities to work on assessments, receive immediate feedback and revise assessments. Here students are given clear feedback on areas of strength and areas for improvement. The materials used are teacher created in line with curriculum planned and approved by departments in each math, science social studies and English. The sessions are provided in mostly English language with some Spanish language support to support the entering and emerging Spanish native speakers. Session for transitioning and expanding students will be provided in all English. Spring Literacy Development Saturday Academy From April to June 2019 we will hold 8 Saturday sessions from 9am-12pm to support literacy skills through an ESL/ELA team taught class for any 10th and 11th grade students. One planning hour will be alotted for each session either from 8am-9am or 12pm-1pm dependent on teacher preference. This program will serve to develop the students presentation skills development, writing and reading skills development in order to increasing achievement in their ELA/ENL. with skills such as; developing argument logically and persuasively, using relevant, convincing evidence and quotations that thoroughly support argument, This will be taught by a certified ENL team with a certified ELA teacher. We will use the six purchased Chromebook for research, academic writing, creating presentations. specific ESL reading support/enrichment focusing on vocabulary and comprehension and writing support. The rationale for this is that our students need extra support in order to be prepared for our rigorous portfolio and Performance 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Based Assessment Task work. The materials used are teacher created in line with curriculum planned and approved by departments in each math, science social studies and English. The sessions are provided in mostly English language with some Spanish language support to support the entering and emerging Spanish native speakers. Session for transitioning and expanding students will be provided in all English. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Many of our ELL students are spread across the math and science classrooms and while receiving a majority of their ENL support in their ELA/ENL and History classes from certified ENL teachers, our math and science teachers struggle to support the ELLs and need additional PD to learn how to meet the needs of the ELL students in their class and support their academic achievement across the contents. This group is intended to study, review and put supports into action to support the ELLs across content areas while increasing their overall academic achievement as well as writing skills in all content areas. A teacher study group has been implemented that focuses on supporting literacy across content areas of of ELLs in an after school book study group. The study group will consist of the four title III teachers Study groups will meet five times. The main text that will be used is "Re-Imagining Writing: Publishing Beyond the Classroom, in additional to other additional online resources to support the text. The group will meet on the following dates and address the following topics: 11/16/18, Lesson Planning to support ELL writing 12/14/18, Analyzing ELL Student Writing, 1/18/19, Supporting Writing for ELL's Across Subjects, 2/22/19, Scaffolding for ELLs in the math and science classroom. 3/22/19, Reading, Writing, Speaking Listening Skills development across content areas for ELLs The teachers will be paid per session from Title III funds and will be for one hour after school from 3pm-4pm. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 0  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Our ELL parent community needs additional support in understanding child's instructional needs in their journey through high school on their way to college. We are providing a series of workshops designed specifically for the needs to ELL parents. ELL parent workshops will be provided on: 10/19, Supporting ELL Parents with Pupil Path - Parent Coordinator 11/16, Understanding and supporting your ELL child through the portfolio, PBAT process- Teacher Elizabeth Pino 12/21, Bilingual Financial Literacy for ELL parents - College Counselor, Talia Ofeck and PC 1/18, The FAFSA Workshop for ELL parents - College Counselor, Talia Ofeck and PC 2/15, Resources for ELL parents in NYC - Parent Coordinator All meetings take place from 6pm-8pm. Parents are notified of these events through mailings, school messenger and Advisor contact home. Translation and interpretation will be provided for each ELL parent workshop. The teachers will be paid per session from Title III funds and $250 will be spent on refreshments for parents. We also host parent community building nights twice a year (Nov and May from 5:00- 7:00) for ELL parents so that parents can meet teachers and each other in a friendly and relaxed way and to make sure they feel like they are a part of the school community. Parents are notified of these events through their children, the school newsletter, letters sent home, and the school messenger. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials. N/A N/A 1  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 2 School Name The Facing History School Borough Manhattan School Number 303 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dana Panagot Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Elizabeth Pino/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Sara Berger/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Jomo Clarke/Science Related-Service Provider Alina Kaplan Superintendent Kathy Pellis Assistant Principal Kristina Wylie C Coach N/A School Counselor Felix Alvarez Parent Alicia Torres Parent Coordinator Rita Laguer Field Support Center Staff Member Daniel Walsh Other (Name and Title) Kenda Nunez/SPED C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 396 3 Total number of ELLs 70 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 17.68%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) N/A K 1 2 4 3 Lang. N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? FHS uses different formative assessments to guide instructional planning for ELLs including NYSESLAT, Achieve 3000, ELA Regents, and Layered Curriculum assessments. At the beginning of the year we use the NYSESLAT score reports to establish a baseline of students' proficiency in the four modalities for organizing classroom activities. Then in combination with the NYSESLAT and past Regents score, planning is determined for any necessary intervention classes like the Becoming Bilingual course for entering and emerging ELLs, and the Regents Prep course for students who have not passed the Regents. To corroborate the data from the NYSESLAT we assess the literacy skills of our ELLs in English and Spanish, using the web-based diagnostic, Achieve 3000. Using Achieve 3000, ENL, ELA and Global teachers can provide content related texts at students zone of proximal development while monitoring student growth and understanding of material. In addition, for ELA/ENL teachers who have students who have taken the ELA Regents in the past, this data combined with students' reading level from Achieve provides a student profile for adjusting instructional practices--student grouping, guided practice, and classroom 4  tasks. Finally, our school's model of layered curriculum has embedded formative assessments, named B Layers that determine students ability to apply the skills they learned in each unit and identify necessary focus areas for upcoming units. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? To support this effort, the ENL department amalgamates the data from NYSESLAT and past ELA Regents into a spreadsheet to share with all staff. This data is then turn keyed to staff by the ENL department, explaining how to use the data for curriculum and instruction. In order to analyze Achieve 3000 data, a program associate facilitates professional development for staff once every semester providing time to model how to use the program best and for reviewing the data yielded by the program. Finally, layered curriculum assessments are analyzed by individual teachers and their departments using student work analysis protocols to inform instructional planning. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? FHS uses a variety of summative assessments to determine student progress throughout their high school years. The baseline is determined using data from NYSESLAT, past ELA Regents exam and grades in order to inform instructional planning. To measure progress throughout the year, teachers use interim data from Achieve 3000 to determine reading growth and A Layers to analyze content level skill advancement. Finally, portfolios (for 9th and 10th grade), panels (for 10th and 11th grade) and performance based assessment tasks (PBATs for 11th and 12th grade) are uses to identify individual students areas of progress and areas of growth. These assessments use all 4 modalities as students are required to write extensive research papers, present their work orally, answer oral content questions, and reflect on their own growth and progress. Teachers analyze progress towards these summative assessments on a monthly basis and review data at the end of each semester. The conclusions drawn from data analysis inform instructional decisions for the following semester. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data is gathered, the ENL coordinator, grade team leaders and administration review students who are either failing or in danger of failing to determine the appropriate course of action. The ENL coordinator identifies ELLs who may benefit from additional instruction and invite these students to attend Extended Day and/or Saturday School. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] FHS does not teach grades K-5. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. FHS uses data from the NYSESLAT, ELA Regents, RLAT from ATS, and ELL Data Analysis Tool to evaluate and inform our ELL programs. Using this data, we predict language proficiency levels for drafting course programming. Once NYSESLAT scores are released, the drafted schedule is revised to ensure that all student needs are met. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? To support this effort, the ENL department amalgamates the data from NYSESLAT and past ELA Regents into a spreadsheet to share with administration to support programming. The ENL coordinator reviews the NYSESLAT scores and works with the programming team to ensure all students are programmed accurately according to their proficiency levels. Part IV: ELL Programming 5  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In 9th and 10th grade students are blocked into heterogeneous groups for their integrated classes. Their English and History classes are taught by a certified content/ENL teacher while their Math and Science classes are taught by a certified content teacher who receives curricular support from an ENL certified teacher. In 11th grade, many ELLs continue to be programmed in blocks, the exception being the AP U.S. History class which ELLs are eligible for based on language proficiency, interest, and demonstrated work habits. While in 12th grade, ELLs are no longer programmed in blocks as the goal is to begin the transition into mainstream classes in preparation for college. For 12th grade classes students are supported through one integrated core class dependent on greatest need identified. Additionally, there is a homogeneous stand alone ENL class for students in entering and emerging language proficiency in order to meet course requirements per CR Part 154.2. Using the EDAT, the ENL coordinator determines students at transitioning and expanding level who would benefit from additional support in developing reading and writing skills in order to meet benchmarks and they are also placed in the standalone course. b. TBE program. If applicable. FHS does not have a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. FHS does not have a DL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Using the recent NYSESLAT report, the ENL coordinator works to assign the required type of service and minutes; and after programming has been drafter the ENL coordinator reviews each students schedule to ensure there have been no oversights. Students receive their mandated instructional ENL minutes through their most reading and writing intensive content classes, which are History and English. Each period is 47 minutes, therefore in one week per course students receive 235 minutes of integrated ENL. Additionally, the standalone ENL course meets every day of the week for one period and therefore, students scheduled here receive 235 minutes of standalone time. Therefore, often ELL are programmed for than the required number of minutes given the block programming particularly in the 9th and 10th grade. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. For integrated ENL classes, ENL teachers work with content teacher to plan instruction and modify or scaffold instruction considering students' proficiency levels. In addition, the layered curriculum model uses performance based instruction in all classes to ensure that students can complete work on a level and pace that corresponds to their learning needs. School wide reading and writing structures give students uniform strategies across the content areas. All content areas are taught in English, but there is native language support and translation available through technology and bilingual teachers. For the standalone course, students are provided with visuals, home language support, and smaller class size to support their development and content areas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To evaluate ELLs appropriately in their home language, home language oral and written assessments are provided as well as using the web-based diagnostic Achieve 3000 as a benchmark. Home language oral and written assessments are used to 6  gather information on students' prior knowledge and understanding of content area topics. We also use mixed level groups of shared home language, where students can discuss responses in language forms that are comfortable to them and then one student shares out for the group in English. In addition, Achieve 3000 supports in continuing to develop students' native and second language progress. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. For students identified as SIFE and having low native language literacy, the ENL teachers provide additional support. Such interventions include placement in the standalone class, the Heritage Spanish class and/or Extended day. We also offer referrals to outside organizations that provide additional ENL support. The use of Layered Curriculum supports differentiation for SIFE students as it provides multiple entry points for students and choice for demonstrating content knowledge. B. For newcomer ELLs, students are assigned a student buddy who shares their home language to provide support. Students are grouped in advisories with bilingual advisors who can provide both the students and the parents support in their native language. All newcomer ELLs are provided explicit instruction of reading and writing strategies using online tools and then provided extensive scaffolding of projects and major assignments based on language ability. Students are provided with content area visual dictionaries to draw on prior knowledge. And all newcomer ELLs are also placed in the standalone class to target basic academic and conversational English skills in a small group setting. C. For developing ELLs support is provided to develop stronger academic English. As such, the school has adopted uniform reading and writing strategies across all content areas in order to provide consistency and repetition and continue to develop stronger reading comprehension and writing structure. These strategies include graphic organizers, sentence starters, annotation and close reading. D. For long-term ELLs, provided support is similar to that of developing ELLs given that they require development of stronger academic English. As such, the school has adopted uniform reading and writing strategies across all content areas in order to provide consistency and repetition and continue to develop stronger reading comprehension and writing structure. These strategies include graphic organizers, sentence starters, annotation and close reading. In addition, these students are encouraged to attend tutoring, Extended Day and Saturday Academy. E. For former ELLs, students are programmed in one integrated class 2 years after testing commanding. Focus for these students is developing their reading skills using Achieve 3000 to approximate grade level reading. These students are encouraged to attend additional ELL services like tutoring, Extended Day and Satuday Academy. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies to provide ELL-SWDs access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development include Layered Curriculum, word walls, and reading and writing strategies. All staff, including ENL and Special Education teachers receive ongoing training in Layered Curriculum to provide strategic entry points in each lesson for each learner. In addition, layered curriculum supports teachers in unit design that incorporates learning activities and assessments for all individuals and groups, including ELL-SWDs. Supports provided to students include reference books (bilingual dictionaries, thesauruses), visuals (posters, graphic novels, graphic organizers), manipulatives, and resources in students' native languages. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In order to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment, FHS uses Layered Curriculum, UDL, and co-teaching models. ICT pairs in classes with ELL-SWDs use a collaborative planning 7  template that ensures there is an individualized plan for each ELL with an IEP. As for scheduling flexibility, 9th grade ELL SWDs are in ICT classes for English, History, Science, and Math. In the 10th grade, they are in ICT classes for English, History, and Math. In the 11th grade, they are in ICT classes for English and History. In the 12th grade, they are in ICT classes in English and Math, and push-in/pull-out support to meet students individual needs in completing their culminating PBATs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. FHS provides targeted intervention programs for ELLs in order to support the success of students in all content areas. Within the content areas, the school wide adoption of layered curriculum and UDL supports teachers in unit design that incorporates learning activities and assessments that provide choice for all individuals and groups. A variety of grade level materials are incorporated into unit and lesson design to provide appropriate supports for ELLs: reference books (bilingual dictionaries, thesauruses), visuals (posters, graphic novels, graphic organizers), manipulatives, and resources in students' native languages. Classroom instruction is provided in English and when necessary Spanish support is used through a bilingual teacher or technology. Students identified as struggling in math are asked to attend extended day with an ENL and Math teacher to provide targeted language and content support this service is provided in both English and Spanish. Tutoring is available for all students in all content areas after school and during lunch, with an ENL teacher on site to provide support if necessary. Saturday Academy is provided in the Spring on select Saturdays to support literacy development. Finally, teachers of ELL blocks meet monthly to look at data, identify specific needs, and organize individual academic interventions. These individualized interventions for crucial to students' success in 9th and 10th grades as they acclimate to the demands of high school. There is a shift in the 11th and 12th grades to providing more individualized support (as evidenced by the push-in/pull-out model) with a focus on academic writing to prepare ELLs for their PBATs and for college writing. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, we will continue to work to support teachers who are willing to get dual certified in Global History and ENL. In addition, we will be improving the Saturday Academy schedule to include dates in the fall for extended support. As well as restructuring extended day for supporting students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs or services for ELLs have been discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are eligible to participate in all school programming including tutoring, student clubs, community service activities, and sports teams. All after school activities and supplemental services are discussed in advisory classes, a smaller class which provides the time and space for more personalized supports and interventions. Advisors communicate and recommend after school and supplemental services that are potentially of interest and use to ELL advisees. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials to support ELLs include graphic organizers, posters, computers, dictionaries, and leveled texts. Each classroom is equipped with a SMART board and teachers have led professional development workshops about various software including Achieve 3000 and online programs that can be used to support Science, History, English, and Math instruction. Additionally, laptop carts are available so that ELLs can access a variety of resources and language support tools online. Dictionaries include visual content dictionaries with basic English vocabulary, bilingual dictionaries in Spanish, French, Arabic and Bengali. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Given the integrated ENL program, home language support is provided based on student need. Whole class instruction and materials are provided in English, for newcomer ELLs and SIFE students they are provided with bilingual glossaries and 8  materials in home language to support understanding. Native language support is primarily provided through a heritage Spanish class. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. To ensure students receive required services/resources that correspond to their age and grade level the ENL coordinator reviews programming for all students at the beginning of each semester and reviews students' grades throughout the semester for required interventions. ENL teachers are also available to work with content teachers in modifying assignments and making content comprehensible for ELLs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? FHS is co-located in the Park West Educational campus with four other high schools. The campus shares a cafeteria, gymnasium, and auditorium. In addition, sports teams like basketball, baseball, and soccer are available to all students in the building. The principals from all schools on the campus meet regularly to discuss how to share these resources so that the needs of all students are met. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). To assist newly enrolled ELLs there is a new admit Orientation for students and their families before school begins. This orientation introduces students and their families to the administration, parent coordinator, the building and student advisors. For students who enroll during the school year, the orientation is held with the social work team, one member of the administration team and ENL coordinator. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELLs are offered Spanish for heritage learners as a language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? FHS does not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All staff attend school-designed Professional Development workshops every Wednesday after school from 2:00 to 4:00. The workshop topics range from literacy development, guided discipline, questioning and discussion strategies, and analysis of data. For 15% of these workshop hours, the ENL department works with administration to develop professional development sessions for supporting ELLs in meeting Common Core Learning Standards. These sessions include all staff--teachers, administration, paraprofessionals, counselors, and social work. The ELL specific sessions focus on effectively differentiating for ELLs and analyzing student work for adjusting instruction to ELL learning needs. Our ENL teachers receive additional professional development from outside organizations like conferences hosted by National School Reform Faculty, New York Performance Standard Consortium, and NYC Division of English Language Learners. 9  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The school meets the ELL specific professional development requirements through school-designed opportunities for all teachers and from outside providers for ENL teachers to expand their network and learning. Records of school designed workshop agendas are maintained by the administration and for outside providers, teachers are expected to submit agendas to the school. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? FHS communicates with parents in a variety of ways throughout the year in addition to yearly orientation, parent teacher conferences and ELL meetings. Each student is assigned an advisor who they stay with for all four years of high school, who serves as the main contact for parents and is responsible for keeping parents informed of academic and behavioral progress at all times. In addition, FHS holds an extra parent meeting in the beginning of the year where we discuss our curriculum with incoming students, prior to any open school night. At this meeting they are informed of all programs offered at FHS as well as supports for their children. Teachers review the curriculum students will be taught and the overall assessments used to gauge the student learning. Also, during each semester we hold an additional open school night for parents of students who are struggling and in need of interventions prior to the end of the semester. Our parent coordinator, social workers, ENL teachers and outside interpreters from the DOE are utilized to ensure we have the interpretation services needed for each event as well as for the fliers that are sent home ahead of each event. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are an integral part of FHS. After review of the Home Language Surveys, the language groups of students and their families are determined and external services through the DOE are arranged. Within thirty days of the beginning of the school year or enrollment of a new LEP student, the parents will be notified of the services they are entitled to in their home language. Letters will be mailed home with this information in the appropriate home language. Additionally, parents’ translation rights and services will be posted on the school’s website facinghistoryschool.org. The school website has a built-in tool for translating all web content into one of thirty languages. We have an active PTA and School Leadership Team. At our first parent meeting and in our first mailing we send out a survey to investigate what topics parents are interested in. We also create workshops based on the needs we see in school, as Social Workers run various workshops on identity, adolescent development and teens dealing with peer pressure/sex/drugs/depression. We also work with the following organizations, Facing History and Ourselves and Urban Arts Partnership to think about holistic supports for students and families. We have monthly parent meetings through the PTA to discuss school issues and parent concerns. We also have parent teacher conferences 4 times a year to assist parents in understanding the high school journey. In addition, we build a strong community through activities like the Potluck Thanksgiving Dinner and Senior Awards Dinner to encourage families to participate in our school community. We conduct end cycle student evaluation that we also invite parents to be a part of. We use the DOE parent survey as well as the Facing History and Ourselves (FHAO) parent survey to evaluate parent satisfaction, concerns and general attitudes about the school. . We have surveyed times that are good for parents, we provide childcare, and we focus on activities that meet their needs. The Parent Coordinator has arranged to support parents of ELL with learning English through a DOE program and as as training in a technical area if parents are interested. She speaks Spanish and is able to translate to those parents. For all other languages the DOE translation and interpretation service is used. 0  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Our ELLs have demonstrated significant growth through the performance based assessment model that the school utilizes. Our performance based assessments allow ELLs to use all language modalities--speaking, reading, writing, and listening--to explain their understanding and exercise critical thinking skills. Assessments are scaffolded to gradually increase student independence and ownership of their work over time. In the 9th grade, students present a collection of their best work in each class in a round-table presentation format. This collaborative setting is non-threatening and supportive, and helps students reflect on their growth with the support of peers and a teacher/facilitator. In the 10th grade, students present portfolios in each class, however the standards for the work presented are raised and the content questions are more rigorous. In the 11th grade, students transition into writing panel papers for each class, a 5-7 page paper that is then presented to a panel of their teachers, advisor and peers. The feedback given to 11th grade panel presenters is geared towards supporting them in completing their 12th grade performance based assessment tasks (PBAT). In the 12th grade, students complete a 6-10 page paper on a topic of their choosing in each class and present it in front of a panel. They must teach their topic to the panel and respond to rigorous content questions. Each PBAT is the equivalent of a Regents examination. This scaffolded approach to assessing students' overall learning is supportive of ELLs in particular because they are given targeted support in oral and written presentation of academic content. Below is an article from Dr. Kathie Nunley's website for educators to explain layered curriculum, the framework we adopted to individualize unit and lesson plans to meet student needs: An Overview of Dr Kathie Nunley's   Layered Curriculum® Today's teacher must teach to an overwhelming variety of students. Any high school class may have students who cannot read past a second grade level. These students are sitting alongside others trying to prepare for next year's Advanced Placement class. There may be as many as five different native languages spoken and each student at a different level of English proficiency. Several special education students are likely to be mainstreamed into the class. There are visual learners, auditory learners, tactile learners, and plain old reluctant learners. Sprinkled in are students with attention deficit disorder and hyperactivity. As a high school biology teacher I am expected to take this eclectic collection of human beings and teach them the curriculum laid out by the state. At first glance this appeared an impossible task, but over the last several years I have designed and created a workable method to differentiate my classroom. The result is a simple five step solution for differentiating your classroom. I call it Layered Curriculum®. Step One: Take the mystery out of your lesson plan by handing it to the students in advance. My students receive a copy of the lesson objectives and assignment options at the beginning of each two week period. These unit sheets contain a variety of assignment options that are designed to meet specific core objectives. Each assignment has a point value based on the complexity and time requirement. Step Two: Divide the unit sheet into three layers. Each layer will represent a level or depth of study on the topic. The bottom layer is called the C layer because students working strictly within this layer can earn a grade no higher than a "C" on the unit. Students are free to choose the assignments they want and in any order. Different assignments are worth different amounts of points based on the complexity of the assignment. Students can choose any number of assignments for any combination of points up to, but not passing a grade of a C. This section represents a basic understanding of the topic and is structured so that any student in the room can achieve this level of success. The greater the diversity in the classroom, the greater the diversity of assignments in the C layer. In the first, C layer, offer a variety of basic assignments to meet the needs of every type of learner you may have. I make sure that I have enough assignments so that even my nonreaders can achieve success. This layer includes hands-on activities for the tactile learners, video and art projects for the visual learners and optional lectures for the auditory learners. Include textbook assignments for students who prefer this traditional method of learning. Include at least one assignment that must be done in any language 1  except English. It is really exciting to watch the interaction between the English-only students and the limited-English proficiency students when faced with having the tables turned.Include art or poetry or history assignments which require cross-discipline involvement. For example, I may ask them to write a poem describing a conflict found in an amphibian's world. Students then must get written feedback from their English teacher on their poem. In my classroom, the C sections is the largest section on the unit assignment sheet because I cover the bulk of my state core curriculum in this layer. There needs to be approximately three times as many assignment choices as required. (e.g.: if you expect them to complete 5 C layer assignments, have 15 to choose from). Step Three: Create a second or B layer requiring more complex types of thinking. This layer requires the students to manipulate or apply the information they learned in the C layer. Here students carry their newly learned basic knowledge a step further. Students "play" with their new information at this layer. They build, design, use, apply, problem solve, create, brain-storm, etc. Other B layer assignments may include interdisciplinary studies, history fairs, application of new words, creative displays of compare & contrast, etc. If you need ideas, look back through the middle layers of your Bloom's Taxonomy. As my original design was for high school biology, a "problem solving lab" is required in this layer. I simply suggest problems such as "How fast does a fish swim in miles per hour?"; "Do snails have a taste preference?"; "What is the volume of a frog's heart?"; "Which brand of mouthwash is most effective in killing bacteria?". I usually list four or five questions that pertain to the unit we are studying. The students are always free to choose another question if they wish, with my permission. I give no other information regarding the lab. They must write their hypothesis and a detailed procedure. They need to gather whatever materials they need, although I will help them find materials after they have written their procedure. It is critical not to give any information or help with procedural designs until after they have written their own ideas. This may be very frustrating at first to the students as they all want to ask the teacher how they are to do the lab. I simply tell my students that I haven't the slightest idea! You will be amazed at the creativity on the part of your students when left to their own imaginations. Step Four: Add a final layer called the A Layer which requires the most complex thinking - critical thinking. Here students mix traditional research with other things like values, morality and personal opinion. Offer students several issues in the topic that are currently under debate in the real world. Students must conduct a literature search to find three recent studies on their topic and then write a critical evaluation of that issue. The final product may take various forms such as a letter of persuasion to a legislator on an environmental issue or a two minute oral presentation arguing their position. Step Five: The final and most important step to Layered Curriculum is assessment through an oral defense of the students' assignments. As students finish an assignment they spend a couple of minutes, on a one-on-one basis, discussing what they learned. Based on the prearranged objectives, I ask several key questions and help clarify their ideas and verify that the learning objectives have been met. This is a wonderful way to meet face to face with every student and assure that they are indeed learning. I often carry note cards with the objectives on them to use during these discussions. The cards help students understand that there is a criteria involved in assessing their learning experience. To manage the classroom easily, you may want to set up various learning stations in your room to free up your time for evaluation and facilitation. One of my most successful ideas has been to put my lectures on audio tape. I use a cassette player with four headsets attached at a listening station. Since lecture is an option, the students can listen to the lecture whichever day they choose. The headsets are wonderful for the attention deficit students who may have a difficult time focusing on a live lecture. This helps isolate them and the information. Physical props can be set out at the table to assist points made in the lecture. Never again will students have to get notes from a classmate because of an absence. It is also wonderful to be able to record your lecture in the quiet comfort of your home or empty classroom ahead of time, free from any interruptions.The video cassette player and television are set at desk level in an isolated corner for those students watching a video. Headphones can be used here too to isolate the noise from the other working students. Laying blankets on the floor in front of the t.v. gives a seating option for those students who seem allergic to the traditional classroom chair. Technology should be used whenever possible. Computer programs make wonderful assignment options especially for the limited English proficiency student because concepts are graphically represented. If you are fortunate enough to have internet access in your room make sure to include research as an assignment option. To save time with oral reports and presentations, a video camera may be set up in a storeroom or quiet area so that the students can record their presentations for your later viewing. This is especially helpful with students who are reluctant to speak before a large group. 2  Another successful idea has been color coding each unit. I photocopy each unit on a different color of paper. This makes it so easy for us to refer to the "green sheet" or "orange sheet", etc. It also makes it much easier for the students to find their assignment sheets in notebooks filled with school papers. I have a file cabinet in my classroom so that students may keep their unit sheets and work in progress in the classroom. This is important for those students who lack organizational skills. When a unit is due, the students turn in their colored unit sheet and I record the points they have acquired. At the end of the grading period they fill out a term summary showing how many points they received on each unit and write down their final term grade. They attach this summary sheet to the four colored units we've completed and turn it in to me for their final grade. There are no surprises. The students understand what it takes to get a certain grade and they have all the control to obtain that grade. Layered Curriculum has been very successful in all types of classrooms subjects and grade level.(See samples page). It requires a bit of a shift in thinking though on both the part of the teacher and the student. The grades are not based on the traditional percentage of correct information remembered, but rather on the depth in which a student pursues the study of a topic. A "C" grade denotes a basic understanding of core concepts. A "B" grade indicates not only an understanding of the material but a personal discovery through an original lab or an application or manipulation of the material. An "A" indicates that the students have mastered the concepts and have included a critical analysis of current issues relating to the subject matter. 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Dana Panagot, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Facing History School School DBN: 02M303 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dana Panagot Title Principal Kristina Wylie C Assistant Principal Rita Laguer Parent Coordinator Elizabeth Pino ENL/Bilingual Teacher Alicia Torres Jomo Clarke Sara Berger N/A N/A Felix Alvarez Kathy Pellis Daniel Walsh Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Affinity Kenda Nunez Other SPED N/A N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 N/A N/A 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 N/A N/A 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M303 School Name: The Facing History School Superintendent: Kathy Pellis The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Rita Laguer Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess parents’ language preferences, we use the Home Language Identification Surveys and Student Emergency Contact cards. This information is then uploaded into our data management system, Skedula, where teachers can see the parents preferred language and plan their outreach accordingly. The majority of our parents speak Spanish for which we have teachers and staff to translate. For parents who speak a language other than English and Spanish, we use the DOE's translation hotline to communicate important school information. All written documents sent home, as well as school messenger info, are sent in both English and Spanish. In addition, official DOE documents are sent home in all languages marked on the home language survey. We employ a bilingual (Spanish) parent coordinator who does extensive outreach with parents and answers any questions parents have. 6  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Amharic Albanian Bengali Bambara Chinese French Mandinka Wolof 291 271 2 1 2 2 2 2 1 1 50.61% 41.13% .35% .17% .35% .35% .35% .35% .17% .17% 287 273 2 1 4 2 2 2 1 1 49.91% 47.48% .35% .17% .7% .35% .35% .35% .17% .17% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Welcome Back to School Documents -Student Handbook -Cell Phone Policy -Uniform Policy September PTA and SLT Meeting Calendar October Documents have been translated; if there are any updates, LAC and bilingual certified teacher will update. Documents have been translated; if there are any updates, LAC and bilingual certified teacher will update. 7  Parent Newsletter (to communicate events with parents and maintain open lines of communication) Fall (November), Winter (January), Spring (April) DOE Survey Flier (explain importance of survey and request parent participation) April Permission Slips Periodically Documents to be sent to translation unit during month prior to distribution, when possible. Otherwise LAC and bilingual certified teacher will update. Documents have been translated; if there are any updates, LAC and bilingual certified teacher will update. Documents have been translated; if there are any updates, LAC and bilingual certified teacher will update. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Orientation (meeting for incoming students to the school) September Open School Night (meeting for senior parents) September ELL Orientation Meetings October Parent Teacher Conferences (for all parents) November and March Senior Awards Night June IEP Meetings Annually interpretation service(s)? Utilize parent coordinator and social work staff for interpretation support when needed. Utilize parent coordinator and social work staff for interpretation support when needed. Utilize parent coordinator and social work staff for interpretation support when needed. Utilize parent coordinator and social work staff for interpretation support when needed. If required language for interpretation cannot be fulfilled internally, will use outside provider. Utilize parent coordinator and social work staff for interpretation support when needed. Utilize parent coordinator and social work staff for interpretation support when needed. If required language for interpretation cannot be fulfilled internally, will use outside provider. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 8  In order to reach limited-English-proficient families in the event of a school emergency, there will be pre-recorded messages that can be used and sent in the event of an emergency. The pre-recorded messages will use staff and the Translation Unit in order to set messages in all languages spoken by families. These would be set up as global connect messenger service and be translated into the required languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. To ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663, all staff will be emailed with the regulation at the beginning of the school year and expected to review before the end of the first week of school. The DOE's language access resources including the language line phone number and translation services will also be detailed in the Staff Handbook which serves as a reference tool for all staff regarding school resources and policies. In addition, the Language Access Coordinator, will lead an all staff professional development highlighting key information from the Regulation including explaining how to use the translation services and the over-the-phone interpretation services. As well, as answer clarifying questions for staff. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The welcome poster will be placed in the main office which is the first place families come in to greet and guide families to the Parent Coordinator. The parents guide to language access will be mailed to all families and shared in person when attending parent conferences to ensure that parents are aware of their right to translation and interpretation. In addition, our parent coordinator will be conducting personal outreach to each student's home in order to be sure they are aware of their rights and services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We utilize the DOE survey, as well as a parent survey for feedback each year. Our parent survey will be translated to Spanish by the Language Access Coordinator. And for other languages the survey will be sent to the translation unit. In addition our parent coordinator is primarily responsible for conducting necessary outreach to parents to be sure they have what they need and provide the steps for them to communicate with teachers and staff at FHS. Our PTA and SLT meet regularly to check in on school needs and to create action plans when needed to address any issues that may arise. 9 
