 02M308 School Name: LOWER MANHATTAN ARTS ACADEMY Principal: LUKE JANKA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Lower Manhattan Arts Academy 3102000011308 9-12 350 Grand St. 212-505-0143 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 02m308 212-674-8021 Fax: John Wenk jwenk@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: John Wenk Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 2 Superintendent’s Office Address: Alexandra Zukerman Amanda Rios and Annette Rodriguez John Wenk Sandra Hyatt Jesse Hernandez, Carlen Rodriguez, Morgan Rodriguez n/a District Information Marisol Rosales Superintendent: 333 7 th Ave. New York, NY, 10001 Mrosales7@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 356-7563 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: 718-425-0516 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) YuetChu Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7 th Ave, New York, NY 10001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-356-3914 Phone Number: 718-425-0516 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name John Wenk Alexandra Zukerman Amanda Rios Sandra Hyatt Jesse Hernandez ZerinaMahdoomi NoaleeNunez Ludmilla Louisdhon Annette Rodriguez Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ parent - co-president   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MorganRodriguez Carlen Rodriguez E'najeonaCarrero Member/ Student Member/ Student Member/ Student Member/ Teacher Member? Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our Mission LoMA is a school that cares. Because we care, we are devoted to the academic, social and artistic development of our diverse family of learners.   Our goals are to awaken a questioning spirit, foster creative expression and prepare students for college. We believe that through hard work, perseverance and enthusiasm every graduate will become a life-long learner and responsible citizen of the world. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Because the Lower Manhattan Arts Academy (LoMA) is a small, supportive arts school that cares, every aspect of LoMA’s design, structure and practice supports its students’ intellectual, emotional and cultural development with the ultimate goal of seeing that they get into and succeed in a four-year college. Our last School Quality Review, Quality Snapshot and School Quality Guide all rate us as effective and highly effective in virtually all areas and our school performance dashboard rates lauds our impact on student performance. While these reports are nice, what really matters is that our students report that our school feels like a family, they are succeeding academically and artistically, and virtually all of our graduates attend college and graduate at a high rate. As an academic school focused on college prep, we see 95% of our graduates accepted into college every year. More importantly, those proud graduates they tell us that they feel more prepared for success than their peers because of how we prepared them LoMA has high graduation requirements than other New York City schools: four years of math, science, and advisory, mandatory extracurricular activities, internship and arts classes. We know what colleges require and we push our students to meet those requirements. As an arts school, the visual and performing arts are integral to every student’s day in three ways. First, students have opportunities to work with visual and performing artists during academic classes to create high quality, standards-based performances of learning. Second, each student also has the opportunity to specialize in a particular art: visual, music, dance or drama. This has led to performances of a student-written play at the Imperial Theatre on Broadway, a student-choreographed dance performed with American Ballet Theatre at the Metropolitan Opera House, a student exhibit at the Whitney Biennial and a musical performance at Carnegie Hall. Finally, LoMA has partnerships with many Lower East Side arts organizations so that every student takes part in an extended day program at least twice a week. This integration of the arts into every student’s day helps to build our students’ cultural, social and academic capital so that they will become successful, thoughtful and contributing members of their communities. As a neighborhood school of the diverse Lower East Side, one of LoMA’s greatest strengths is its connections to community-based organizations. LoMA has developed partnerships with the following organizations and universities: Henry Street Settlement, New York Theatre Workshop, Educational Alliance, Learning through an Extended Arts Program (LEAP), St. Luke’s Orchestra, The Door, John Jay College and New York University. Keeping the size of our school community to about 300 students makes LoMA feel like a family. Yet small size is not enough to guarantee that each student will buy-in to the culture of a school that expects success from all of its members. Student government, five school-wide performances a year, monthly school trips and many planned social events are essential components for creating a sense of community. Some of these events are our annual Thanksgiving Family Feast and LoMAPALOOZA. We have a variety of specific programs to support our high-need students. To provide social and emotional support for our students, we have four full time and three part time counselors, one of the lowest counselor-to-student ratios in the city. To meet the needs of high and low achieving students we use a collaborative team teaching model so that nearly half of our classes are team-taught. Through our partnership with New York University, we have tutors and student teachers to provide more individualized instruction, and nearly half of our seniors take college classes each year there and at John Jay, NYU and Baruch colleges. All of our students also receive academic guidance support through daily, twenty-minute advisory classes and a twenty-minute reading period with a class size of fewer than 0  fifteen students and our very popular tutoring program. Daily case management meetings attended by administration, guidance and teaching staff proactively assess student progress so that emerging at-risk students can be targeted for further academic intervention services while high achieving students also get the attention that they deserve to remain challenged in all of their classes. At LoMA, a student’s day does not end at 3:00 as our extended day program supports instruction and offers students a wide variety of high interest, community-building activities. These include the LoMA Theatre Ensemble, NY Cares volunteer group, swimming, leadership programs, yoga, Ultimate Frisbee, and academic clubs. Varsity PSAL tennis, volleyball, basketball, handball, soccer, wrestling, badmiten and bowling teams are also available. Every senior takes part in extensive internships with organizations such as the Abrons Arts Center, The Public Theater and Harlem Hospital. With LoMA’s small student population, high faculty to student ratio, rigorous standards, nurturing environment, arts-infused lessons and focused student-centered teaching methodologies, we know that our students will be successful. You can find evidence of this success and more on our school website, lomanyc.net, under the statistics link. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. About 1/3 of LoMA's student population have been identified as needing special education services. Most of these students are learning disabled and so have greater needs for for such methods as RTI, scaffolding, chunking, small group instruction. More importantly, many of these students need a supportive environment where they can feel safe to take risks and cared for by a supportive community. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Building on our work last year in developing unit plans using the Understanding by Design templates with a particular focus on differentiation and critical thinking, this year's focus was on developing project-based learning experiences that made learning more hands-on, authentic and memorable. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M308 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 329 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 12 12 8 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 32 21 7 7 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 74.0% % Attendance Rate 73.9% % Reduced Lunch 6.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.2% 55.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.25 0% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 81% 69% 76.6% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A YES No N/A 129 126 5 84.3% 0.3% 34.3% 27.7% 8.2% 5.8% 2 88% 5.7 N/A N/A 75% 67% 79.0% 17% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. For twelve years our students have exceeded expectation on every Regents Exam every year according to the School Quality Snapshot and the former School Progress Report. Our graduation rate is above that of our comparison group. Our most recent Quality Review scored us as well developed in high expectations and curriculum, but proficient in pedagogy and assessment. ` 2. Student surveys and town hall meetings indicate that students want more actionable feedback on assignments and more opportunities for Socratic seminars. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. All teachers will improve feedback on student assessments so that by June, 2019 they will share one example of student work feedback that meets the highly effective standard on a research based feedback rubric we will develop as a team. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Workshops on effective assessment and feedback at faculty conferences with a particular focus on SWD. All teachers September and October Principal Workgroups will meet by department to develop strategies for effectively and efficiently providing feedback for tests, homework essays and projects. In each group, student work and feedback from and to ELLs and SWDs will be evaluated. During each PPG meeting, supervisors will review and discuss progress on developing specific, actionable feedback Workshops on Accountable Talk and Socratic Seminar (to be done by the Great Books Course if funding is available). Teachers will be given planning time in teams to develop Socratic seminars aligned to the course standards and CCLS. Teachers will invite administration and colleagues in for observations of their Socratic seminars All teachers November Administration and December All teachers All teachers January and February February and March Administration Administration All teachers March and Administration April All teachers April and Administration May 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will host a Welcome Back to school event in September where parents and teachers will have the opportunity to discuss this initiatives and the common core shifts that will be occurring in the academic and arts classes. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teams will meet during regular scheduled Monday meeting times. Per session will be offered from Tax Levy funds if further time is needed for the teams to meet. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 4  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, each teacher will present example of his or her feedback to students. Observations in Advance will indicate effective or highly effective rating for all teachers in assessment. A spring observation will indicate teacher success in conducting a Socratic seminar. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will use the guidance from the Great Books Course to monitor success in Socratic Seminars and implementation will be gauged on Advance through lesson observations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? A supportive environment for students begins with a supportive environment for staff. After years of strength in this areas, our last two school surveys indicate a drop in staff-staff trust. Last May and June, the staff took part in a series of trainings by the organization on Wadeko on community building, and on racism. We will build on these foundations next year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, our school environment surveys will show a 10% increase in the areas correlated with staff-staff trust. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All staff will intervisit once a semester a teacher with whom he or she does not usually work with. All teachers September-May Assistant Principal All teachers and paras Sept-May Assistant Principal At one staff meeting a month, teachers strategically selected by the administration will share best practices around different focus area with particular attention to be paid to SWDs and ELLs. A staff team will organize a community building activity once a month. These may include bowling, volunteering at an animal shelter or staff dinner. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All staff September-June Assistant Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The principal and PC will discuss this goal and the progress being made towards it at the October PA meeting and every third month at our SLT meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Intervisitations will occur during regularly scheduled time and pre and post observations will occur during circular 6 time. Staff, of course, will pay for their own activities as appropriate. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 7  By February, 2019, a Survey Monkey, similar to the one used this year, will show a 10% improvement in staff attitudes towards trust and support. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey Monkey and School Environment survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The School Environment Survey indicates that teachers have been satisfied with the PD they have received and our teacher teamwork was rated well-developed on the Quality Review. At thrice annual Personal Pedagogic Goals (PPG) meetings teachers indicate satisfaction with the differentiated nature of the PDs they attend. Advance reports indicate that about a third of the staff received highly effective in professional development as they had attended so many conferences and workshops outside of school required PD. At the staff retreat, staff expressed a need for more sharing of best practices and more collaborative meetings for freshmen teachers more intervisitations and a need to focus on professionalism. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result ot teacher collaboration through intervisitations and monthly PD sessions on the sharing of best practices, we will see a 5% rise in credit accumulation among 9th graders at June, 2019. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A PD committee will be formed to plan best practice sessions and other PD activities with a particular emphasis on the needs of SWDs and ELLs. PD Committee The second week of September Principal Each month, the PD team will ask specific teachers to share best practices around specific pedagogy that have had a positive result on SWDs and ELLs. All teachers will intervisit with a colleague once a semester and complete pre and post-observation worksheets. All teachers October, PD Committee January and June Teachers Sept-June Administration A professionalism workshop will be held to develop best practices around staff to staff behavior. Surveys three times a year will indicate improvement. Staff September-May Professionalism Committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The principal will discuss this component every three months at the SLT meeting. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Intervisitation will occur during the regular school day meet during circular 6 time. The other activities will occur during the regularly scheduled Monday meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 0  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Survey Monkey results will show improvement in 5% improvement in the quality of PD and staff professionalism. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A committee created survey monkey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. For the past twelve years our students have exceeded expectation on every Regents Exam every year according to the School Quality Snapshot and the former School Progress Report. Our 2018 graduation rate is above that of our comparison group. Our most recent Quality Review from 2018 scored us as well developed in leadership development. ` 2. Student surveys and town hall meetings and Quality Review from the 2018-2019 school year indicate that students want more specific, actionable feedback and meaningful classroom discussion. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Each department will develop and implement a plan to increase focused, actionable feedback on tests, essays and projects that will meet the well developed mark on research-based, teacher developed rubric on quality feedback. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Workshops on effective assessment and feedback at faculty conferences with a particular emphasis on SWDs and ELLs. All teachers September-October Principal Workgroups will meet by department to develop strategies for effectively and efficiently providing feedback for tests, homework essays and projects with a particular emphasis on SWDs and ELLs. All teachers November-December Principal During each PPG meeting supervisors will review progress in providing effective feedback All teachers Workshops on accountable talk and Socratic Seminar All teachers January-February February-March Administration Administration Teachers will be given team planning time to plan and implement Socratic Seminar lessons All teacher March-April Administration Teachers will intervisit and or invite in administration to review Socratic Seminar lessons. All teachers April-May Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will host a Welcome Back to school event in September where parents and teachers will have the opportunity to discuss this initiatives and the common core shifts that will be occurring in the academic and arts classes. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teams will meet during regular scheduled Monday meeting times. Per session will be offered from Tax Levy funds if further time is needed for the teams to meet. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 3  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, each teacher will have received at least one score of effective on a sample of feedback on student work. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February, each teacher will present example of his or her feedback to students. Observations in Advance will indicate effective or highly effective rating for all teachers in assessment. A spring observation will indicate teacher success in conducting a Socratic seminar. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. While our 2018 Quality Review rated us as well developed in trust, our surveys from the same year from parents indicate that we need to do more outreach to our families. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 50% of families will use the Remind App by June, 2019. Attendance at each 2018-2019 parent teacher conferences will increase by 10% from the year before. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will use the Remind App to invite parents to activities. Update the webpage more often Send the LoMA calendar link to the families All school events will be promoted to "suggested donation." 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents and Guardians Sept., 2018 PC Whole school community and partners September, 2018-June, 2019 Parents and guardians September, 2018 Students and families September, 2018-June, 2019 Dean PC and Principal Assistant Principal If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Educational Alliance, The Door, Community Healthcare network. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I will cover food for family events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 6  By February, 2019, 40% of families should be on Remind App. By March., 2019 we will see a 10% rise in 3 parent teacher conferences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Remind App Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Repeated readings, interactive writing approach Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group After school 4 semester algebra Team teaching During the school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Grades in English class, teacher recommendation, parent input 8 th grade NYS test scores, school written diagnostic exam, Teacher evaluation, Parent input Regents Grades Intensive test prep Social Studies Regents Grades Intensive test prep During the school day and after school During the school day and after school One on one and small group tutoring for all seniors who still need to pass Regents to graduate One on one and small group tutoring for all seniors who still need to pass Regents to graduate One on one and small group tutoring for all seniors who still need to pass Regents to graduate One on one and small group tutoring for all seniors who still need to pass Regents to graduate 8  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Multiple pink slips Restorative Circles Small group During the school day 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 28 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We purchase necessary supplies, offer greater guidance support and teachers make accommodations where necessary, particularly with an understanding of attendance issues. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All new staff are interviewed by committees of teachers and counselors and conduct model lessons. The decision is always based on consensus. Retention has not been a problem, except for a couple of retirements; all of LoMA’s found staff are still on staff ten years later. We tend to lose about two staff a year – mostly to maternity. The entire staff meet upstate twice a year to plan for school policy ad professional development. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). As noted above, we will follow an inquiry model for PD that will focus on areas that the faculty deem as important. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. All tactical decisions regarding appropriate multiple assessment measures and professional development at LoMA are made through weekly open cabinet meetings attended by the entire staff. Strategic decisions are made at twice a year upstate retreats. A veteran teacher coordinates all PD. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 16, 18 11-19 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 172,141.00 0 0 0 2,483,574.00 x x 3  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 4  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Manhattan Arts Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Lower Manhattan Arts Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 6  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA /State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 7  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Lower Manhattan Arts Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 8  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 9  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 0  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 1  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Manhattan District 02 School Name LOWER MANHATTAN ARTS ACADEMY School Number 308 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal JOHN WENK Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Candra McKenzie Teacher/Subject Area Josh Stillman/SPECIAL EDUCATIO Teacher/Subject Area Joel Lederer/ELA Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent MARISOL BRADBURY Assistant Principal YETTA GARFIELD Coach type here School Counselor THANDI NEWTON Parent type here Parent Coordinator TRECE CORDERO Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Michelle Zalph/ School Secreta C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 3  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 354 Total number of ELLs 16 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.52% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? LoMA teachers design their own tools to assess our ENLs. They confirm the NYSESLAT data that our ENLs struggle with academic writing and struggle somewhat less with academic reading. We are using the data to guide scaffolding for writing and reading in all classes. Because of these results and other students' struggles with academic literacy we have introduced school-wide reading and writing scaffolds. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? As a school, there are weekly grade team meetings that occur discussing the strength and weaknesses of each child. Once we look at the data for each class, we go over any successful strategies that work in a subject and apply it to the other 4  subjects. Teachers worked on graphic organizers as well as key terms that could be shown in various classes so students would get reinforcement needed for the content. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We have seen NYSESLAT scores go up each year at LoMA. We attribute this to the co-teaching model, which allows students more time in small groups with their content area teachers. We also attribute success to LoMA's school-wide, cross-curricular reading and writing scaffolds, and the extended-day tutoring program. Because it is presented as part of the school day and necessary for all students, ENLs students feel comfortable and compelled to attend. This gives them a great deal of one-on-one support from their teachers. These supports, along with differentiated instruction in every classroom, are helping our ENLs to reach their full potential in English. Again, however, our greatest concern is reaching long-term ENLs and getting them engaged in all of their academics, not just ENL. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? As a school, there are weekly grade team meetings that occur discussing the strength and weaknesses of each child. Once we look at the data for each class, we go over any successful strategies that work in a subject and apply it to the other subjects. Students needed help in History and English due to the writing. Teachers worked on graphic organizers as well as key terms that could be shown in both classes and students would get the reinforcement they needed. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We do not have this grade span. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We have studied the results of the NYSELAT exam. The sample size (our ENL population of 16 students) was too small to identify correlations between instruction and student improvement. We did notice that many of our ENLs scored proficient on the Listening and Speaking sections while less scored proficient on the Reading and Writing section. This informs us that more attention has to be placed on writing and reading skills. This is one of the reasons for the implementation of Wilson interventions and cross-curricular writing and reading scaffolds. As our ENL population grows, we will be able to better identify patterns. 6 of our current ENLs have sat for NY State Regents Exams. Three ENLs passed all or the majority of their exams. Three ENLs did not pass any of their exams. All ENLs opted to take their exams in their native language. The students who did not pass receive one-on-one tutoring for the exams they failed. These results are better than the results of the general population. Because we are a small high school, we have not yet had to administer the NYSITELL. (We have only administered the LAB-R twice in the previous ENL teacher's tenure at the school.) 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We are continuously evaluating the data from state exams, content area assessments, informal observations, and weekly collaborations to help understand the needs of our ENL students. Throughout the year, we use these structures to provide extra support in the class working with the ENL teacher to push in to the content classes or working with the students after-school in a one-on-one setting during tutoring. Part IV: ELL Programming 5  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Because our ENL population is so small, all ENLs of all proficiency levels are placed with the ENL teacher for daily Advisory and Drop Everything And Read (DEAR), for a total of 40 minutes per school day, during which ENL and academic skills are explicitly taught. Additionally, the ENL teacher pushes in to academic classes containing ENLs of varying proficiencies, including ELA classes. Incoming Emerging and Transitioning 9th grade ENLs are also placed in a Wilson intervention, to support encoding and decoding in English, which meets 4 days a week (180 minutes). All interventions combined, ENLs at LoMA receive well above than the mandated number of minutes of English instruction. For all proficiency levels of ENLs at LoMA, students receive the required number of minutes of ENL instruction according to their proficiency, through the combination of the push in, co-teaching in their core classes and pull out by the ENL teacher. Both teachers in all of our co-taught classes are well-versed in the scaffolds needed to provide instruction to students struggling with literacy and language issues. Because we follow a co-teaching model, these scaffolds are used in the context of content-based instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. This program is not available at our school. c. DL program. If applicable. This program is not available at our school. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? For all proficiency levels of ENLs at LoMA, students receive the required number of minutes of ENL instruction according to their proficiency, through the combination of the push-in, co-teaching in their core classes and pull-out by the ENL teacher. Both teachers in all of our co-taught classes are well-versed in the scaffolds needed to provide instruction to students struggling with literacy and language issues. Because we follow a co-teaching model, these scaffolds are used in the context of content-based instruction. We generally only have ENLs who are Transitioning or above in level, and they receive more than the required 180 minutes per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We have a combination of a push-in and collaborative co-teaching model. In addition, all of our ENLs are in content classes which are co-taught. Both teachers in each of our co-taught classes are well-versed in the scaffolds needed to provide instruction to students struggling with literacy and language issues. Because we follow a co-teaching model, these scaffolds are used in the context of content-based instruction. All classes are block and grouped heterogeneously. Content area instruction is delivered in English. However, especially in the case of emerging students, teachers make an effort to group or pair ENLs with a student who speaks their native language, if use of the native language would benefit student comprehension. Teachers are well-versed in scaffolds necessary to support language development, and attend staff development workshops to this end. Teachers use scaffolds in class such as: use of visuals and props, graphic organizers, adapted texts, and bilingual and/or English-English dictionaries, modeling, accessing prior knowledge, focusing on challenging vocabulary, reading aloud, ensuring sufficient wait time, and native language use, among many others. All teachers make an effort to ensure that none of the cognitive demands of the original content are lost when it is modified. In addition to the above, LoMA has a tutoring program after-school that all students are encouraged to take advantage of, especially our ENLs. Teachers frequently meet with students for one-on-one instructional support, in the tutoring program or at other times 6  during the day. Reading and writing scaffolds are in place across curriculum to support ENLs in Common Core demands such as finding and citing evidence in writing and reading non-fiction informational texts. In the co-teaching model, generally one teacher is charged with lesson delivery while the other is able to circulate among students to ensure comprehension of content and make necessary modifications. However, during the application or activity segment of a lesson, both teachers may be able to circulate, allowing them to work one-on-one, with pairs, or in small groups of students. When the ENL teacher pushes in to classes, she works with the ENLs to ensure language issues do not interfere with comprehension of content. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? As a small 9-12 school, it is rare that LoMA receives students who were not identified as ENLs by their middle or elementary school. Therefore native-language evaluations have already been done, and LoMA follows the determinations of these evaluations. If LoMA has to evaluate a student, appropriate translated documents and interpreters are utilized. As noted in Part IV, #3, the ENL teacher has successfully obtained IEPs for several students. When these students are evaluated, evaluations are done in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) All our ENLs are screened to see if they are SIFE. Currently at LoMA, we only have 2 students who are classified as SIFE. This is only the third time we have had SIFE students, therefore our SIFE policy at LoMA is evolving. The SIFE students are placed in the ENL teacher’s advisory, which meets 40 minutes per day for language and academic skills reinforcement, while also focusing on social-emotional issues. The ENL teacher is well-versed in SIFE needs. The SIFE student is also in the ELA class which the ENL teacher teaches. LoMA has 3 full-time social workers on staff, and SIFE (as well as any other) students are referred to them or for outside counselling if the need arises.We feel that SIFE students benefit from one-on-one meetings with teachers, and with the ENL teacher in particular. SIFE students are encouraged to attend extended-day tutoring, and ENL teacher has met frequently with the students there, as have the other content area teachers. The ENL teacher ensures that in these sessions as well as in the other content area classes, effective academic practices, such as note-taking, listening skills, responding to prompts and teacher questions, and organization of course materials, are emphasized, modeled, and explicitly taught. (b) The plan for newcomers is that they learn English for both academic and social purposes. In the co-teaching model, teachers work one-on-one with them as much as possible on areas such as vocabulary, listening, basic reading comprehension, and writing structure. Because we have such a small population of ENLs and 5 newcomers total, this is possible for our teachers to do, during and outside of class. Two of our newcomers also have IEPs and have been placed in the 15:1 class. Therefore, they receive a great deal of individualized attention. All students are also served in the tutoring program after-school or meet with teachers before school. In their classes, they benefit from all of the above-mentioned scaffolds utilized by teachers at LoMA. (c) We have 3 ENLs who have been receiving services for 4 to 6 years. We continue to provide them with scaffolds and one-on-one or small-group instruction as much as possible, as well as serving them in the extended day tutoring. The goal is to differentiate instruction to target the areas of difficulty on the NYSESLAT. Many of our students struggle with academic writing, as indicated by NYSESLAT scores, and we now use two school-wide writing scaffolds to aid all students, especially those who struggle with this modality. (d) For long-term ENLs who have been receiving services for over 6 years, we realize that it is crucial that their academic English skills catch up to their social English skills (all are Advanced or Proficient in oral language as indicated by NYSESLAT scores). This issue depends on the length of time a student has been an ENL. We currently have 3 long-term ENLs, ALL of whom have IEPs. For the long-term learners, we continue to support these students through scaffolds, 15:1 classroom settings, co-teaching, and tutoring to make academic reading and writing of English less abstract and more applicable to their lives. We have seen our numbers of long-term ENLs passing the NYSESLAT increase in recent years, and we believe this is due to our intense focus on reading and writing across the content areas and the consistent use of scaffolds by all LoMA teachers (not just ELA and ENL). (e) Former ENLs remain with the ENL teacher in advisory for 40 minutes a day even after they have scored Proficient on the NYSESLAT. This way they can still 7  receive the linguistic and academic support they need and the ENL teacher can advocate for them with their content area teachers. They also are placed in the co-taught English class for five days a week. Continuing transitional support for ENLs is provided during class through the co-teaching model and in extended-day tutoring. After reaching the Proficient level on the NYSESLAT, former ENLs will still be given accommodations on Regents exams for two years. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All ENLs and SWDs are placed in collaborative co-taught classes. Generally, one teacher is charged with lesson delivery while the other teacher is able to circulate and guide select students in comprehension of content. Scaffolds utilized by all LoMA teachers include pair- and group-work, visuals and audio-video, props, vocabulary aids, graphic organizers, adapted texts, dictionaries (bilingual and English-English), accessing prior knowledge, reading/thinking aloud, modeling, among many other adaptations. LoMA uses a school-wide reading scaffold and a school-wide academic writing scaffold. All teachers have attended teacher-taught workshops on these two scaffolds to ensure smooth implementation in all content areas (including Science and Math). 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In addition to being placed in collaborative co-taught classes, ENLs and SWDs benefit from LoMA's extended-day tutoring program. There they are able to meet with teachers in small groups or often one-on-one. LoMA also utilizes Wilson and Just Words programs to work intensively with ENLs and SWDs on encoding and decoding issues with English. We follow an inclusion model, and students at LoMA are heterogeneously grouped, where collaborative co-teaching allows us to avoid pulling ENLs or SWDs out of academic classes. Teachers often make packets of adapted curriculum for students with special needs, and they use their adapted curriculum alongside their peers. Teachers also adapt assessments for ENLs (with the ENL teacher's guidance) and SWDs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All ENLs at LoMA are placed in collaborative co-taught classes with teachers who are well-versed in scaffolds and supports for struggling students. All content area classes are taught in English, with native language supports available to ENLs who need them. All content area classes have extended-day tutoring available to all students, including ENLs, as targeted intervention. Whenever necessary, a translator or peer is provided for students if use of the native-language in tutoring would be helpful for them. All teachers aid the learning of ENLs using visuals, realia, graphic organizers, vocabulary, alternate texts, and specific focus on English language. Additionally, all incoming 9th grade emerging and transitioning ENLs are placed in Wilson interventions, to aid encoding and decoding in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Because all of our ENLs, except two, are classified as Transitional and above, the ENL teacher will continue to reinforce academic English skills with the ENLs and to support them with reading and writing scaffolds. LoMA will ensure that the instructional models used with ENLs adhere to the mandated minutes of instruction following the NYS CR Part 154 Regulations. LoMA will continue the use of Wilson programs with all incoming 9th grade ENLs for intensive work in encoding and decoding, and has plans to pilot a literacy program to support students struggling with academic reading and writing. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs or services for ENLs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All classes are taught in English and ENLs are always grouped with the general education population. All extra-curricular activities, as well as extended-day tutoring, are open to ENLs regardless of their level of English. Most ENLs participate in extra-curricular activities. At LoMA a student’s day does not end at 3:00 p.m., as our extended day program supports instruction and offers students a wide variety of high interest, community-building activities. These include theater, yoga, the 8  LoMA Theatre Ensemble, NY Cares volunteer group, mentoring from the employees of Oppenheimer Funds, leadership programs, skateboarding and academic clubs. Varsity PSAL tennis, volleyball, basketball, handball, soccer and bowling teams are also available. Every senior student takes part in extensive internships with organizations such as the Abrons Arts Center, The Public Theater and Harlem Hospital, and in addition near two thirds of them are currently taking college classes at NYU, John Jay College or on-line through an izone school partnership. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Technology is used in every class. All teachers use SMART boards in their classes, especially to add visual support to lessons. Laptop carts are available for all classes. All classrooms have an extensive classroom library and laptops available for students to use whenever needed. ENLs are encouraged to download translation apps on their phones, and the ENL teacher helps them with this. Additionally, LoMA has a daily Drop Everything And Read (DEAR) period for all students to engage in extended silent reading or read-alouds. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? At LoMA, we only have an ENL model. Native-language support is provided by bilingual staff, peers, and bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services support ENLs and resources correspond to ENLs’ ages and grade levels. No below-grade materials are used. Instead, ENLs are taught the same content as their peers but with modifications for comprehensibility and accessibility, using the scaffolds and resources outlined above. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? LoMA shares the library, auditorium, gymnasium, and cafeteria with five other schools. ENLs are encouraged to visit the library throughout the year for independent reading and research. The ENL teacher utilized continuously to assist in selecting books as well as to understand what resources are available for research and translation services. The auditorium is used for school play rehearsals, dance performances, and Art displays. ENL students are encouraged throughout the year to take part in opportunities that promote these spaces for academic skills as well as to work with students from various grade levels. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the school year, the ENL teacher will have an informal meeting with incoming ENLs. They will be given a tour of the school and will be given an orientation session. If possible, an intensive ENL course will be given for a few days before the school year begins. We only have a few incoming 9 th grade ENLs each year, so they will take part in the welcoming activities with all of the other 9 th graders, accompanied by the ENL teacher. As soon as the school year begins, the ENL teacher has one-on-one meetings with all ENLs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish is the only language elective currently offered at LoMA. ENLs are welcome to take Spanish as a foreign language. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We are not a dual language school. 9  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Because all of LoMA’s teachers teach ENLs, they all must attend a professional development workshop to guide their instruction. Any staff members who have not yet attended a workshop will do so this year. Staff is encouraged to take advantage of Q-TEL professional Development activities that are sponsored by Central. The ENL teacher has participated in various trainings, including Q-TEL, and also provides workshops or works one-on-one with teachers to adapt their content for ENLs. The ENL teacher has already attended several professional development workshops focused on the Common Core for ENLs. The previous ENL teacher, attended three workshops in Q-Tel training focused on the Common Core. The ENL teacher continues to work closely with the 9th, 10th and 11th grade ELA teachers to design the 9th, 10th, and 11th grade curricula, aligning it with the Common Core standards and differentiating it for ENLs. CFN 107 was active in advising and guiding teachers with implementation of Common Core, and the ENL teacher still uses these resources. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The transition from middle to high school is of great concern to us at LoMA for all students, not only ENLs. In meetings held several times every week by grade level, individual students are discussed by all staff who teach them. ENLs are focused on in particular, and the ENL teacher is present in these meetings. Teachers are reminded to work with students on transitional skills from middle school to high school, such as: goal-setting, time management, writing skills, keeping track of assignments, and organization of materials, among others. These are focused on intensively in advisory as well as in content area classes, especially in 9th and 10th grades. Teachers will often take time one-on-one with students to help them with these skills. The ENL teacher meets with ENLs about their schedules, teachers, and homework, and answers any questions they have. Professional development presentations are held throughout the year for all teachers. They focus on differentiation of instruction, including strategies for teaching ENLs. New teachers are also sent to special professional development days sponsored by the Learning Support Organization or Department of Education targeting in order to meet the minimum hours of mandated ENL training for all staff. Professional development at LoMA focuses intensively on improving literacy, among our native-speaking, SWD, and ENL populations. Other topics include the process of second language acquisition, content area strategies, and how cultural differences affect teaching and learning. Our ENL teacher is also a resource for all teachers on staff, and is available to answer questions and help to modify content and assessments. Teachers maintain records of their PD hours and records are stored with the payroll secretary. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Because 50% or more of our ENLs have IEPs, issues surrounding goals, language development, and proficiency are always discussed in IEP meetings. Further, the ENL teacher maintains close contact with all ENLs' parents (utilizing translation/interpretation as necessary). If parents are not present at parent-teacher conferences (where the ENL teacher 0  meets them separately), the ENL teacher calls them in for a face-to-face conference or phone call to discuss their child's progress (with translation if necessary). 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We have very strong parent involvement at LoMA, due in great part to the efforts of our Parent Coordinator, Trece Cordero, who is on the Language Allocation Policy team. LoMA encourages parental involvement through the participation of parents in regular, two-way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including ensuring • that parents play an integral role in assisting their child’s learning; • that parents are encouraged to be actively involved in their child’s education at school; • that parents are full partners in their child’s education and are included, as appropriate, in decision-making and on advisory committees to assist in the education of their child and the carrying out of other activities. Several members of our staff are bilingual, and every effort is made to involve parents of ENLs in the school. Specific areas of parental involvement at LoMA include the Parent Association, volunteering in meetings, and other individual volunteering (sports, chaperoning, fund-raising, among others). Parents of ENLs are encouraged to be involved at the school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, John Wenk, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Lower Manhattan Arts Academy School DBN: 02X308 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) John Wenk Title Principal Yetta Garfield Assistant Principal Trece Cordero Parent Coordinator Candra McKenzie ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jacqueline Nieves Parent Joel Lederer Josh Stilman Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Thandi Dowridge School Counselor Marisol Rosales Paula Waldron Andrea Alter Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other IEP Coordinator Michelle Zalph Other Payroll Secretary Peter Markovics Other Special Education Teacher Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/21/17 6/21/17 6/21/17 6/21/17 6/23/17 6/21/17 6/21/17 6/21/17 6/21/17 6/21/17 6/21/17 6/21/17 6/21/17 6/21/17 6/21/17 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02 School Name: LOWER MANHATTAN ARTS ACADEMY Superintendent: MARISOL BRADBUR The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During the summer contact was made with each student’s home. If the phone was answered by a non-English speaker a translator ascertained the translation needs for the family. Students who are new to our school are identified as possible English Language Learners (ELLs) at intake if their Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) shows that their home language is a language other than English. Using this data and initial interviews with parents allows us to determine and maintain records of interpretation needs. At this point in our school's development, the great majority of important communication with parents is already translated. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 4 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The great majority of our parents speak and read Spanish (which our ENL teacher/LAC is fluent in). After that, Mandarin is the most common language, followed by Cantonese. The past year, we had 3 new students who spoke the African languages Mandinka, Wolof, and Niger-Congo, but parents also spoke French and English, so communication was in those languages. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All of the above documents are disseminated each year, as well as information about our frequent field trips (we are an arts school) and our in-school medical clinic. All of the documents have already been translated and are generally distributed to families at the beginning of the school year. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 5  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Formal face-to-face meetings with parents will occur several times throughout the year: Open School Night and 2 Parent-Teacher conferences, as well as Parent Association monthly meetings. Informal contact with parents also occurs at our frequent student performances (dance, music, drama). The ENL teacher is the Advisor to all ELLs and former ELLs because we have such a small ELL population. She maintains logs of contacts in Skedula Anecdotals (if public for all teachers) or privately in Google Documents (if private for her own records). She maintains logs of numbers called, who was spoken with, if a number has changed or is not working, and what was discussed. Informally, we also have an annual Thanksgiving community dinner the Tuesday before Thanksgiving, which is very well-attended by families and parents. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage 6   Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All of the above mentioned practices fulfill the Chancellor’s Regulation A-663. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents are asked to fill out a survey at Parent-Teacher conferences, and it is also mailed home. 7 
