 06M311 School Name: AMISTAD DUAL LANGUAGE SCHOOL Principal: ROBIN EDMONDS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Section 1: School Information Page School Information Amistad Dual Language School 06M311 06M311 K-8 4862 Broadway Ny, Ny, 10034 212-544-8021 School Number (DBN): 212-569-7765 Fax: School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: Robin Edmonds redmonds@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Robin Edmonds Amy DulskyLittle Vera Moore MarthaLangmuir Paula Francis N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 06 Superintendent’s Office Address: Manuel Ramirez Superintendent: 4360 Broadway Room 419 New York, NY 10033 MRamire4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 917.521.3757 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: 917.521.3797 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director:   333 Seventh Ave, 8th floor NY, NY, 10001 Executive Director’s Office Address: YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Robin Edmonds Amy DulskyLittle Vera Moore Paula Francis Wanda Matos Nico Ledezma Abundiz *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher   Name Priscilla Araya Karime Gonzalez Wee Prabal De Martha Langmuir Lucy Mendieta Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our mission statement is as follows; Our mission is to have all students equipped with the necessary skills to engage in a competitive world by teaching them to be critical thinkers, who learn through creative paths, while maximizing the power of two languages. Our mission is rooted in providing each of our students an individualized educational   experience through various modalities and collaborative work to best accomplish student achievement. Together we foster a sense of communal responsibility and solidarity through the celebration of culture, language, and diversity. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Amistad is a dual language, K-8 school of choice in northern Manhattan. The school services two classes per grade and we follow a 50-50 language allocation policy (50% of the time in English & 50% of the time in Spanish). The school’s composition is as follows: 426 students registered from K – 8. The school population is comprised of approximately 92% Hispanic, 2 % Black, 5% Caucasian, and 1% Asian. Boys account for 46% of the student enrollment and girls account for 54%. The student body includes 22% ENL students and 11% students with disabilities. Amistad has developed various partnerships to support students and enhance their educational experience. This includes afterschool CBOs FYI (Grades 6-8) and Little Red Rocket (Grades k-5). Additionally, we have relationships with educational and artistic institutions to broaden opportunities for our students and to enhance their experiences. These institutions include RowNY, Lang Medical Program, American Ballet Theater, BOKS, CHAMPS, and the Alvin Ailey Dance Company. Professional Development possibilities for our teachers include but are not limited to Teachers College, NTN, Assessment Matters and Generation Ready. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The student body includes 24% ENL students and 13% students with disabilities. Our subgroup in greatest area of need are SWD. Although SWD demonstrated growth in both ELA and Math school-wide, there is greater room for growth. 50% of students scored Levels 3 or 4 on the NYSED ELA Assessment. However, just 14% of SWD and 24% of ELLS / Former ELLS scored Levels 3 and 4. In Mathematics, 37% of students scored levels 3 or 4 including 14% SWD and 23% ELLS / Former ELLS. Over the last two school years, Grade 3 has had the greatest amount of growth in literacy and math as evidenced by approximately 40% gains in both NYSED ELA and Math assessments. Grades 7 and 8 Math saw the least amount of growth over the last two years. 7th grade increased levels 3 and 4 in math just 10% and 8th grade just 8%. Currently 72% of ELLS are either Expanding or Commanding. The 2017-2018 School Survey indicated the following results:  Rigorous Instruction : 3.82  Collaboration: 3.66  Effective School Leadership: 3.99   Trust: 4.18 Family-Community Ties: 3.94 0  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Amistad is supported through Professional Development in Literacy, Mathematics, and assessment practices. The providers help in providing professional development and implementation strategies that support the Common Core Learning Standards, Math and Literacy Shifts, and Danielson. Teachers work collaboratively in teacher teams to create differentiated lessons to meet the needs of all learners. Teacher teams focus on student outcomes through writing and implementing common assessments, norming grading, and analyze data and student work. Parental involvement is an integral component of our school. Parents actively participate in decision-making via SLT meetings and they support our instructional programs via fundraising and partnering in classroom projects and school-wide celebrations. Parents hold two PTA meetings per month. Our academic area of greatest need is mathematics with 37% of students in grades 3-8 on or above grade level (i.e. Levels 3 and 4 on NYS Tests). In particular, Grade 7 had the least amount of students with levels 3 & 4 on the NYS Math Test with just 23%. UPDATE Our subgroup in greatest area of need are SWD in which only 3% of SWDs tested proficient in math. The school survey revealed that: Our profession areas of focus will be: 1. Prioritizing formative assessment--ongoing differentiated PD will be provided on school-wide formative assessment strategies. 2. Expanding learning opportunities--teacher teams will receive PD and ongoing support in literacy and mathematics. 3. Providing effective and timely feedback to teachers--administration will conduct cycles of evaluative observations, learning walks followed by state of the school reports, and quarterly meetings with teacher teams to analyze student work and best practices. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M311 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 395 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 11 12 22 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 24 20 20 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 81.0% % Attendance Rate 77.0% % Reduced Lunch 25.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 91.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.08 0% 18% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 50.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 72% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 23 23 18 95.5% 4.1% 13.2% 1.5% 1.5% 0.8% 2 14% 6.6 36.9% 28% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Overview: A focus on creating and implementing rigorous tasks and improving instructional practice in Domain 3 will be supported with strategic professional development and administrative feedback to improve the school's greatest area of academic need, mathematics. 1. State data showed an increase in student achievement from 2015-2016 to 2016-2017 as evidenced by NYSED Assessment data of 4-5% in both ELA and Mathematics. State data then showed an increase in student achievement from 2016-2017 to 2017-2018 of 14% in ELA and 11% in Mathematics. 2. Based upon the results of the MOTP Advance tracker from the 2017-2018, teachers increased the average from the first to the last cycles of observation following targeted professional development for Danielson's 3D Assessment in Instruction as follows: from an average of 2.42 in Cycle 1 to 2.73 in Cycle 4. 3. Our instructional focus was developed by the PD Team. Prior to developing the instructional goal, teacher teams analyzed prior testing data to determine trends. The team then developed the instructional goal that incorporated the common goals of teachers articulated through summative conferences. 4. Our instructional focus is to use formative assessment to monitor student learning and inform teacher practice to improve outcomes. The instructional focus will be supported through the Professional Development Team, Data Coach, Assessment Matters / Mastery Connect training, and peer collaboration. Trust is established and maintained through the teachers and administration working collaboratively to target student needs through data. Teachers routinely perform inter-visitations, veteran teachers routinely share best practices, and teachers participate in model lessons. Administration also makes a daily commitment of visiting each teacher’s class on a daily basis to support instruction and help the facilitation of best practices. 5. Regarding the last Quality Review, PS/IS 311 must work toward ensuring that pedagogical practices are more consistent between classrooms. Data Summary: UPDATE NYS Math Test  28 % Level 1  35% Level 2  37% Levels 3 & 4 3  NYS ELA Test  20% Level 1  30% Level 2  50% Levels 3 & 4 NYSESLAT  24% of students are ENL  22% of students are Commanding  49% of students are Transitioning  22% of students are Expanding  5% of students are Entering  1% of students are Emerging New York State Accountability  Our current status is – Good standing. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By May 2019, 43% of our third through eighth grade students will have achieved at least a level 3 in mathematics as evidenced by the NYS Mathematics Assessment. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will analyze data to strategically identify 10 Middle School students (5 students from seventh grade and 5 students from 7th and 8 th grade) on level 1 or low level 2 on the State Math exam to provide targeted interventions aligned to the specific student needs. These students will receive small group tutoring in Math one period per week (circular 6 period). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018- June 2019 Middle school Math teachers 5 level 1/ low level 2 students in 7th grade & 5 level 1/ low level 2 students in 8 th grade We will identify and differentiate math supports to various learners using state test data and formative assessment data such that: ENLs will receive targeted interventions weekly after school, Level 1 students will receive weekly intervention, Level 2 students, 7 th / 8 th grade students that are approaching a Level 3 will receive additional support via Saturday Academy. The SOLVE strategy will be utilized to provide language support and entry into word problems. We will analyze the item skills analysis in Math for grades K-8 using the Mastery Connect and IReady Data to identify strands that need to be strengthened and adjust our curriculum to accommodate these needs. Students Oct - May Teachers Classroom teachers in grades 3-8 September 2018-June 2019 Classroom teachers grades 3-8 and Administration PD Provider NTN will provide teachers with support and professional development in the creation of rigorous tasks and best practices to support Danielson's Domain 3. Classroom teachers in grades K-8 September 2018-June 2019 Classroom teachers grades 3-8 and Administration and PD Provider 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 5  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019, 2 parent workshops on mathematics will occur at each of the three developmental levels (K-2, 3-5, and 6-8). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Math Coach (NTN), state test score results for 2018, item skills analysis data, end of unit test scores, spreadsheet for end of unit test score data, baseline and benchmark assessments for 7 th & 8 th grade small groups (end of year assessment from the prior grade), Circular 6 periods, data to indicate the lowest quartile school-wide in Math.  A Title III Program, federally funded supplemental service, is provided to our ENL population weekly. This program will focus on increasing our ENL students’ English proficiency around math terms through small group instruction.  After School Intervention programming to support students with supplemental instructional tutoring and activities.  Programming was adjusted from prior years teachers’ schedules so that Math instruction occurs in the beginning of the instructional day at least three times a week.  The amount of time dedicated to mathematics instruction has increased in grades K-6 from 70 minutes per day to 90 minutes per day two years ago.  We have support teachers through a math coach from NTN and assessment coach through Assessment Matters to aide in supporting teachers in analyzing data, analyzing student work, identifying best practices, and utilizing best practices in instruction. Saturday Academies will take place beginning in October to help all students in the areas of mathematics and literacy.  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The administration and teacher teams will track the progress of all students using i Ready Diagnostics. The data will be reported to administration via the administrative window three times during the school year (September, January and June. Curricular and instructional next steps will be developed with teacher teams and administration based upon the data collected. Mid point check: All students in each grade will complete i-Ready Diagnostic tests three times per year. By February 2019, more than 35% of students will have scored a Level 3 or better on their Predictive i Ready Assessments report 6  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) By February 2019, more than 35% of students will have scored a Level 3 or better on the iReady Predictive assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our comprehensive assessment for the Supportive Environment Element was informed by a variety of data. The data indicates that our students feel that teachers respect their culture or background (98% - agreed or strongly agreed), classes prepare them for the next grade level (85% agreed or strongly agreed), and 92% of students feel safe in their classes.. NYC School Survey (administered to students in 6th – 8th grade in Spring 2018)  We examined the most recent survey data for our students’ responses to the school culture in respect to how they feel about the school’s learning environment. A sampling of the questions and the percentages of students that agreed or strongly agreed are as follows: o Re: Feeling Safe   “I am safe in my classes.” – 92% agreed or strongly agreed “I am safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms, and cafeteria.” – 84% agreed or strongly agreed.. o Re: Feeling Supported  80% of students indicated teachers give them specific suggestions about how they can improve their work in class.  63% of students indicated that all or most of their teachers notice if they have trouble learning something.  54% of students indicated a positive response around classroom behavior. This is a 17% deficit compared to the district average.  During the 2017-2018 School year, there were 32 incidents as recorded in OORS of which 13 were a Level 4 or greater offense. School Quality Snapshot  Amistad exhibits strong family and community ties. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 8  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Amistad Dual Language School will increase student survey responses to 60% or greater positive responses around classroom behavior. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). By October 2018 all teachers will receive turn-keyed Lion's Quest curriculum and training for weekly advisory program All students will receive weekly advisory lessons as part of their schedule that will address social-emotional issues related to the developmental age including but not limited to peer conflict resolution, social media, bullying, time-management, etc. Student Government will be established to give student voice and create greater ownership among students resulting in behavioral improvements. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers Oct. 2018 Administration Students K-8 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers 5-8 Student Government Advisers, Students grades 5-8 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019, Amistad Dual Language School will provide two workshops for parents around the how parents can support the social-emotional development of their child(ren). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School staff, sign-in sheet, Lion's Quest curriculum Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 0  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, OORs data will demonstrate a minimum decrease of 3% in incident reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data, School Survey responses Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. For this Capacity Framework Element we examined our last Quality Review 2017-2018. The area of focus identified was: 1.2 Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products. Amistad received a proficient rating in this area. Additionally, in looking at the 2017-2018 School Survey, areas of interest include:  100% of teachers say that the principal sets high standards for student learning.  100% of teachers say that the principal makes clear to the staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals.  100% of teachers say the principal understands how students learn.  97% of teachers say that the principal communicates a clear vision for the school.  96% of teachers say that the principal is strongly committed to shared decision making. Quality Review – Indicator 1.2 The proficient rating on the rubric indicates the following:  Pedagogical practices were inconsistent.  Accountable talk and cooperative group interactions were inconsistent. Summary Our teacher teams are meeting consistently, using grade level common prep periods to plan data-driven instruction, to examine students’ work, to revise units of study and lesson plans, to gather materials and to determine next step strategies. Currently, we have two teachers on a team. To increase teacher capacity, we expanded this practice into vertical meetings so that teachers could gain a vertical understanding of their content and create goals and next steps to support student learning. Protocols for common planning and support on data driven instruction will be an ongoing part of the teacher-team process. For the 2018-2019 school year we have partnered with Assessment Matters once again to ensure the quality and use of formative assessments supporting our priority of providing differentiated instruction that meets the needs of all students. Considering the compelling research about the significance of effective feedback correlating to improved student outcomes and in consideration of supervisory observations and teachers’ ratings this year, it is determined that for the 2018-2019school year our Leadership's focus for teacher improvement will continue to be Assessment in 2  Instruction and Feedback to Students (Danielson Framework for Teaching, component 3d), leading to improved student performance and progress. We have partnered with Assessment Matters and Mastery Connect to implement an assessment tool and structure that will support the school in further developing an assessment-informed school culture where leaders, teachers, and students use formative and summative assessment data to direct and enhance learning. Frequent follow-up will ensure that students are implementing the feedback provided by teachers to improve their work and achieve greater academic progress. By strengthening this practice, teachers will increase the implementation of differentiated instruction, ensuring that engaging and challenging instruction is provided to all students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 6% increase in Levels 3 and 4 as measured by the NYS Mathematics and ELA assessments. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?   development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In September we will dedicate PD time to introduce the concept and to establish the protocol and minutes for the teacher team vertical & horizontal meetings. All teachers  Administration will analyze MOTP data after each cycle of observation to analyze trends and make strategic planning and PD decisions to meet the unique needs of teachers and teacher teams.  Weekly administrative cabinet meetings will discuss observational trends and conduct norming exercises.  Consultation Committee and PD Committee members will participate in quarterly walkthroughs to analyze the impact of PD and suggest purposeful next steps. September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Consultation Committee, PD Committee All teachers will be scheduled for weekly common planning times at least 4 x a week. All teachers Coaches and / or administration will participate in 1 common planning monthly to give feedback to teacher teams. All teachers All teachers will receive PD around quality standards based assessment, analyzing student work / data, and implication for instruction monthly All teachers Administration Admin / Coaches Assessment Matters September 2018 to June2019 September 2017 to June 2018 September 2018 to June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019, teachers will conduct conversations around specific data-based feedback to all parents about their child's progress at least 3 times a year using Mastery Connect and i-Ready data sources and include specific strategies and supports that can be used at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 4  Teacher teams, inquiry template for looking at students’ work (known, almost known, confusions & next steps), four 35 minute “Other Professional Work” periods , Math / Data coach, admin, Assessment Matters, Mastery Connect, iReady Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By Feb. 2019, iReady data will show an increase of at least 3% in the predicted proficiency levels of 3-8th graders in both ELA and Math for levels 3 and 4. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. State Test Scores, iReady Data, common planning minutes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Improvement of teacher effectiveness in the area of Danielson’s Domain 3 will occur through frequent visits and actionable feedback to teachers with the intent to improve instruction and students’ academic achievement. Based upon the results of the MOTP Advance tracker from the 2017-2018, teachers increased the average from the first to the last cycles of observation following targeted professional development for Danielson's 3D Assessment in Instruction as follows: from an average of 2.42 in Cycle 1 to 2.73 in Cycle 4. Additionally, 19 of our 31 teachers are non-tenured and new in their teaching career. Quality Review During the Quality Review, rubric indicator 1.2 was identified as Proficient and as an area of focus for our school. This indicator, under the Proficient category states that: The proficient rating on the rubric indicates the following feedback:  Learning exchanges are independent and predominantly teacher to student and student to teacher, indicating limited opportunities for student-to-student discussion and learning.  Accountable talk and cooperative group interactions were inconsistent.  PPO feedback acknowledged differentiated group work, but a lack of formative assessment in those specific groups. NYC School Survey: In referencing school leadership, teachers responded…  100% of teachers say that the principal sets high standards for student learning.  100% of teachers say that the principal makes clear to the staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals.  100% of teachers say the principal understands how students learn.  97% of teachers say that the principal communicates a clear vision for the school.  96% of teachers say that the principal is strongly committed to shared decision making. Summary 6  In summary, the data indicates that the professional growth of teachers, professional development, and actionable feedback from school leadership that is clear. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Amistad will increase Assessment in Instruction (3d) from a school-wide average of 2.62 in 2017-2018 to 2.9 or better, as measured by the HEDI scale average on the school’s MOTP report. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Professional development on formative assessment and data-driven instruction will be conducted. This includes Professional development around using formative assessment to inform instruction and differentiate rigorous scaffolded tasks for various learners will be given 10 times throughout the year by Assessment Matters. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers September 2018 - May 2019 Assessment Matters Administration Regular actionable and meaningful feedback from administration and coaches for teachers related to Assessment for Instruction given via observation reports, meetings with teacher teams, and informal feedback All teachers September 2018 - May 2019 Admin / Coaches MOTP Cycle Data will be analyzed in cabinet meetings to determine trends and plan strategic next steps. Quarterly PD surveys will be conducted to determine teacher feedback around impact of PD on their practice. PD Committee members will conduct quarterly walk-throughs to analyze trends and determine next steps regarding the impact of PD and the consistency of implementation building-wide. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019, Principal Edmonds will hold 4 Coffee with Robin events to provide a forum for parents to communicate with administration about the school's Instructional Focus around assessment. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PD via Assessment Matters, coaches, administration, parent coordinator Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administration will conduct a midyear benchmark in February 2019 by which point there will be a noted increase Assessment in Instruction from a school-wide average of 2.62 in 2018-2019 to 2.8 or better, as measured by the HEDI scale average on the school’s MOTP report. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance MOTP Data reports PD Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. For this framework element, we looked at our PTA attendance data from last year, our attendance rate for Parent Teacher Conferences, School Quality Snapshot, our attendance rate for last years’ parent Math workshops, and the questions pertaining to parents on the NYC School Survey. PTA Meeting – Attendance Data Our parents hold two PTA meetings each month for a total of eighteen meetings. One meeting is held in the morning and another meeting is held on the same day in the evening to make it convenient for parents to attend. On average, 25-28 parents attend each meeting. Parent Teacher Conferences Our Parent Teacher Conferences are well attended. Our most recent conference was attended by over 350 parents. School Quality Snapshot  94% of parents are satisfied with the education that their child has received. NYC School Survey  93% of our parents say that we keep them informed about their child’s performance.  97% of our parents say that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school.  100% of our parents say that we communicate in a language that they can understand.  96% say that the school is strongly committed to shared decision making.  95% say that the school has teachers work closely with families to meet students’ needs.  95% say that the school communicates regularly with parents.  98% say that they are satisfied with the education their child is receiving.  98% say that the school is kept clean.  98% say that their child is safe at school.  98% are satisfied with the response they get when they contact the school. 0  Summary Parents are an integral part of our school. Our parents feel informed, feel welcome and understand that their feedback to the school is valued. We have a Parent Coordinator and a Parent Room in our school so that parents can meet for workshops. Last year we had a series of classes in English as a New Language taught by one of our parents. Last year, the Math Coordinator gave 14 workshops for parents focused on the ‘Instructional Shifts’ of the Common Core. The Math Coordinator identified strategies and games that parents could use to help their child at home. These workshops were well attended and our survey at the end of the year indicated that the parents wanted to continue with another series of workshops this year. Our goal this year is to continue to support parents with workshops. We intend to keep our parents informed and actively engaged with their child’s education and we believe that help from home will have a positive effect on our “student progress”. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, grade team teachers will conduct 3 parent workshops per year focused on how parents can support their child's learning as measured by sign-in sheets from school events. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  The parent coordinator will establish English Language Parents workshops for parent beginning in October.  ACDP will be invited to provide workshops on community October 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator / PTA resources to parents.  EngradePro will bolster the communication between families and the school in grades 6-8.  An automated phone system will be utilized to provide updates and reminders about events for parents in Spanish and English.  The school website will be updated to provide an accurate calendar of events for parents and information about those events. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The School Intervention Team will have 2 parent workshops by June 2019 to support families in identifying and seeking assistance for mental health support. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Flyers for parents, smart board, parent room, feedback forms, attendance sheets, website, automated phone system Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2  We will use the sign-in sheet for attendance to monitor progress toward this goal. We will also monitor via surveys after each workshop. Our mid-point benchmark date is February 2019 by which 30% of parents will have participated in at least one parent workshop as determined by sign-in sheets from events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Surveys, discussion during Cabinet meetings, Conversations with Robin (principal/teacher informal monthly meetings) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State ELA tests Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Interactive writing – argumentative writing Small group During the school day Mathematics State Math tests In-house baseline assessments, observations In-house baseline assessments, observations Referral from parents or teacher Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Repeated readings Reviewing and reinforcing basic skills Writing in the Content Area Writing in the Content Area Discussions through play therapy and book discussions and activities Small group Small group Small group During the school day During the school day. During the school day. One-on-one and small groups During the school day 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 1 students 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Academic Intervention School Supplies Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 3 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5 Afterschool programming, school supplies, clothing 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The Amistad Dual Language School engages in the selection of highly qualified staff and we invest in the on-going training of our teachers. Parents, Teachers and Administrators form a hiring committee in May to interview candidates for upcoming vacancies. After the interview, we invite the candidates, that we are interested in, to do a demonstration lesson which is observed by parents, teachers and administration. Using a rubric and observation notes the teacher scoring the highest number of points is selected. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). To encourage professional growth we formed a Professional Development committee to brainstorm ideas for quality professional development. We surveyed the staff to see what their preferences were. We created a professional development calendar for our eighty minute professional development period on Monday. We offer weekly professional development sessions with our Literacy Coordinator and our Math Coordinator and we encourage inter-classroom visitations with colleagues. We allocate money for outside professional development and our teachers are invited to attend PDs to further their understandings Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. . 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 7  . Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). . 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We have numerous committees in our building, in which teachers participate, thus encouraging our teachers to engage in decision making. We have the following committees: MOSL, Consultation, SLT, Professional Development, Middle School and Language. MOSL chooses Early Childhood assessments in ELA and Math. The Professional Development committee schedules professional development that includes action plans for assessments. In addition, we have a Math Coordinator who reviews all assessment data and provides professional development as needed. We also have a Literacy Coordinator who reviews all assessment data and provides professional development as needed. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5B Section 5B Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal $235968 $33775 x X 8  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local 12366 0 2613064 x x Section 5B Sections 5B-5C 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 9  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Amistad Dual Language School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Amistad Dual Language School will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 1  The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;   2  conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Amistad Dual Language School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by:  using academic learning time efficiently; 3 respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 4  Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   3. III. Student Responsibilities 5  Student Responsibilities: attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully;       8th grade complete at least 40 hours of community service always try my best to learn. 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Amistad Title III After School Program will target approximately 84 ENL students in grades 1-8 based on the 2018 NYSESLAT data provided on ATS. Students targeted will include subgroups such as ENL students who are also SWDs and some of our school's Lowest 1/3rd. Within that grouping we have proficiency levels spanning from entering to expanding. ELL students require additional support and opportunities to develop oral and academic language as well as their literacy skills. The After School ELL program will integrate social studies, science, and vocabulary and academic language acquisition to support development in both content knowledge and the use of language, thinking and reasoning skills in English. All instruction will occur in English. Teachers will differentiate instruction and employ second language acquisition strategies to support academic language development and writing skills. Instruction will be differentiated based on individual student needs using student’s strengths as a starting point. In writing, teachers will focus on developing and strengthening students’ on-demand writing skills. They will focus on scaffolding extended response in writing through the use of pre-writing organizational structures and prompts. ELL students will develop their English oral language skills which will have an impact on their English literacy skills to expand their academic and social language to bolster success. Students will be engaged in constant questioning and discussion as outlined in the Danielson Framework for teaching rubric. On-going assessments such as running records and conference notes will be administered to monitor student growth and to drive instruction. During the duration of the 1.5hr session instruction will address each of the modalities as follows: 30 minutes dedicated toward Reading instruction, 30 minutes dedicated towards Writing instruction, 15 minutes dedicated towards Listening skills and 15 minutes dedicated towards Speaking skills. In an effort to differentiate from daily instruction, students will mostly be exposed to leveled Social Studies and Science Non Fiction class sets which will be used to develop necessary skills based on previously analyzed in-house assessments, as well as, ELA and NYSESLAT testing data. These books will support all modalities and activities will have multiple entry points in which overlap will occur. In terms of Speaking, we will incorporate various Ice Breaker activities in an effort to increase expressive language. Images and topics will be generated by student participants during introductory lessons as a way to create ownership for participation, create interest based learning and solidify a risk free environment. Seven bilingual certified teachers will service groups that are no greater than 15 students. The groups will be organized by grade levels potentially as follows: Grade 1 section, Grade 2 section, Grade 3 section, grade 4 grade section, Grade 5 section, Grade 6 section and Grade 7/8 section. The program will run once a week for students on Wednesdays for 1.5 hrs from 2:45pm to 4:15 pm from Oct. through May for a total of approximately 13 sessions. The Assistant Principal, Olga Ramos, who is a certified bilingual educator, will coordinate and supervise all aspects of the program during part of her regular working hours, which end at 3:30pm, and will continue supervising thereafter paid through per session as there are no other programs running on those days nor is there another supervisor present. The instructional materials will be DOE approved which will be appropriate, high interest, leveled and specifically designed for ENL students. Non Fiction & Fiction leveled class sets will be purchased from DOE vendor Attanasio at a cost of approximately $2400.00. We will 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information lift academic language from prior released NYSESLAT exams in an effort to provide students with test like experiences and add any required skills . These materials will be solely used for Title III during its duration so that students can acquire use of academic language through prior test examples. In addition it will build students abilities to think, reason and identify cause and effect in English. Any additional materials will be purchased using other funding sources. Additional funds will be used to purchase supplies over the amount indicated below. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: All academic teachers in the Title III program have received or in progress of their masters in bilingual education and or have their Bilingual Extension. All teachers continue with their professional development by attending workshops offered by Higher Institutes of Education, DOE and other institutions such as Teaching Matters, Teachers College or Heinemann either during the year or during the summer. Some Title III allocation will be used for further teacher professional development. The Title III supplemental instruction teachers are provided with professional development in reading and writing in order to enhance their knowledge and experience in differentiated instruction based on individual student needs and the progression of language acquisition specifically looking at expressive and receptive language. The professional development also allows teachers to increase the support of oral and academic language as well as their literacy skills that will in turn increase the opportunities for students to become proficient in the English language. Some literacy skills will be developed by components of balanced literacy, such as but not limited to, Shared Reading/Guided Reading and Interactive Writing. Some will be done during the day where teachers, in small groups, will be released for 1/2 day or full days to attend approximately twice a month in house workshops with the consultant Sally Lentini, a Literacy Consultant from Generation Ready, with a follow up of a one to one session, to discuss their individual needs on the above mentioned topics. We will also incorporate extensions of this work during our Monday allotted time for this professional development. The dates for these professional developments are as follows: 10/1, 10/22, 11/13, 11/26, 12/4, 12/18, 1/14, 1/22, 2/15, 3/4, 5/29. These session(s) will support the above mentioned 7 teachers as well as the Amistad teaching staff to better develop the oral language of our ELL population. The skills students acquire can be transferred into their written and receptive language as well. Hence, providing our teachers with these supports will directly impact the work they do with our Title III program participants, as well as, all ELLs in our building. In addition, Amistad will also provide professional development for our staff that is at no cost to Title III funding. Some of those professional development sessions topics will consist of the following: continued work surrounding Danielson: 3C & 3D, Teacher Team Protocols, Data Analysis, How to Analyze Student Work with Next Steps, Increasing student participation, Enhancing teacher planning, Social/Emotional needs of students, Differentiated Instruction Strategies. Some of the sessions mentioned above will be revisited through out the year. 9  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The Title III program’s parental component will consist of ESL classes. We will have a parent volunteer conduct free ESL classes for our parents of ENL students. The volunteer is a grandmother and retired certified teacher. It will be held every Wednesday starting December from 8:30am - 10am, however, these time frames are based on the parent's individual availability and is subject to change. Again one of the main focuses is trying to help develop the English language orally so that they can participate in casual conversations with their children in an effort to also help them with their own language skills. Since this is a volunteer there is no definite schedule or end date. As a result of receiving the services for free we will be providing parents with materials for this class. Parents who would attend either or both workshops are notified of these activities by our telephone communication system, Blackboard Connect, letters sent home via mail, and follow up phone calls made by our Parent Coordinator. Also, with the support of our Parent Coordinator the school provides other workshops and meetings for our ELL parents that are at no cost to Title III funds. Workshops host topics surrounding fostering of native language in an English dominant society, social emotional learning, math instruction and facilitating key organizational skills for young adults. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, n/a n/a Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a n/a 0  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 06 School Name Amistad Dual Language School Borough Manhattan School Number 311 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Robin Edmonds Coach - ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Anabel Capellan Teacher/Subject Area Janilda Valentin Teacher/Subject Area Zaira Wallace Related-Service Provider Zaida Elias Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Olga Ramos Coach - School Counselor Juan Bello Parent Vera Moore Parent Coordinator Eulalia Lugo Field Support Center Staff Member - Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 6 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 22 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 410 2 Total number of ELLs 84 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 20.49%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): English / Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 3 4 1 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 19 0 0 19 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Across all grade levels we use Running Records on leveled books (Fountas & Pinnell) to assess the early literacy skills of our students. We calculate the running records to determine the percentage of accuracy in Reading as well as the rate of self correction. We also assess the fluency rate using a fluency rubric designed by NAEP (National Assessment of Educational Progress). 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Running records are assessed to determine levels and the strategies that are used at the point of difficulty in reading, and to inform next step strategies for teaching. We teach reading in the dominant language up until level E (Fountas & Pinnell) in English or equivalently leveled texts in Spanish. After level E, we introduce Reading and Writing in both English and Spanish. We begin shared and or Guided Reading in both the dominant and the second language and we use Interactive 3  Writing in both languages. In writing, for early childhood, our students are writing in their dominant language until they achieve a level E in reading when we introduce Interactive Writing in both languages. At this stage our students can manipulate basic vocabulary in their second language to support their writing. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? As a dual language school we closely monitor the progress of our English Language Learners. All ELLs are identified (current, former, long term & special needs). Their progress is assessed using all available standardized data in core subjects as well as in-house data (running records administered monthly, math unit tests, rubrics for genre writing, unit tests/projects in Social Studies/Science and mid-lesson assessments for understanding). 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The educational cabinet (Principal, Assistant Principal and Literacy Team) reviews ELLs writing three times per year. We monitor progress in next steps as we review benchmark writing samples. This year we will additionally monitor progress over time with the benchmark and baseline data from the Measures of Student Learning assessments, iReady platform, as well as, daily mid-lesson checks for understanding. Each year we have a focus for our Title 3 program that grows from the previous year's NYSESLAT data. We cross-check this information with the next year's NYSESLAT to evaluate the success of the Title 3 program. We monitor State Report cards to determine AYP. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our Tier 1 Core Instruction is rigorous in all content areas to support Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing. We plan for and teach content specific, specialized vocabulary for all units of study to develop Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency. We preview and review difficult vocabulary and we unpack abstract concepts. In reading, we guide conversations during Guided Reading of leveled texts and we facilitate conversations during Literature Circles. Our teachers are trained in asking open ended questions to engage students in conversations around the big ideas in texts. We have individual conferences to assess progress via Running Records and to prompt students towards next step strategies. In writing, we expose students to a variety of genres, we use Interactive Writing in the early grades and individualized writing conferences to support students through the writing process. We model writing and our students keep writer's notebooks to record ideas in order to explore self-generated writing. In grades K-4 we incorporate word work sessions where we explore spelling patterns, analogies and high frequency words in both English and Spanish. As a dual language school we support all content areas in both languages so our students are consistently making cross-language connections and the home language and culture permeates connections to the community and to the school. Classroom observations are on-going by the Principal and Assistant Principal, with feedback to maintain a rigorous and cohesive program. Within teacher teams we monitor standardized and in-house data to look for patterns in achievement and areas in need of attention. The educational cabinet, comprised of the Principal, Assistant Principal and Literacy Team review the writing of all ELL students at least three times a year to monitor success and to advise classroom teachers about next steps. Our Math Staff Developer and Literacy Team meet with teachers 2 to 3 times a month to support Tier 1 core instruction in Math, Reading and Writing. Our Tier 2 instruction unfolds in numerous ways. We screen students using standardized test scores (for grades 4-8) and in house baseline data (for grades K-3) to determine groupings. For Tier3 Instruction we have a Literacy Team to screen students for Intervention groupings and next step strategies. We also schedule one-to-one Reading Recovery like sessions (tier 4) with students in Literacy to clear up confusions and to accelerate learning. This program is carefully monitored with revision of progress for each student. Prior to any evaluation, for ELL students and for EP students, teachers meet with the Assistant Principal to discuss their concerns and to develop possible next step strategies. If the student continues to demonstrate academic difficulty we review the success of all the strategies that we have already put in place. Only when our Tier 2 and Tier3 strategies have been exhausted, and do not show any signs of progress, do we consider evaluation. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 4  In looking at our NYSESLAT data we identify strengths, patterns and areas that may need improvement. Based on data as of the end of 2018 we currently have 84 ELL students identified from K-8th grade. The data for Kindergarten indicates that we have 2 student on the Emerging level In first grade: 1 student on the Entering level, 3 students on the Emerging level, 5 students on the Transitioning level and 7 on the Expanding level. In second grade: 1 student on the Emerging level, 6 students on the Transitioning level and 1 students on the Expanding level. In 3rd grade : 4 in Transitioning and 7 students are in Expanding. In 4th grade : 3 in Transitioning, 7 in Expanding. In 5th grade : 10 in Expanding. In 6th grade : 3 student in the Transitioning level, 9 in Expanding. In 7th grade : 2 in Transitioning and 9 in Expanding. In 8th grade : 1 in Transitioning and 7 in Expanding. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At the beginning of the new school year Administration and staff disaggregate data and different patterns and areas of need are identified. Data is reviewed by grade bands K-2,3-5,6-8 and potential high leverage foci are developed followed by actionable and measurable goals/steps. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. N/A b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. The Amistad Dual Language School has two classes per grade, 4 of which are ICT grades K, 1st, 5th & 8th and one self-contained Special Education class servicing Kindergarten/1st grade. In grades K-4 we subscribe to the one teacher - both languages model. These classroom teachers teach all content areas (Reading,Writing, Math, Social Studies and Science) using a 50-50 language distribution model. In grades 5/6 we use a Core Curriculum Model where one bilingual teacher teaches Literacy and Science and the other bilingual teacher teaches Math and Social Studies using a 50-50 language distribution. In grades 7 and 8 we departmentalize with a bilingual teacher for each content area using a 50-50 language distribution model. The students in 7th and 8th grade follow block programming. We use heterogeneous groupings across all grade levels. . This year we have a 4 ICT classes, therefore, one class on the grade has two bilingual teachers (one in General Education and one in Special Education) using the 50-50 language distribution model. Our language allocation policy varies by grade to accommodate conversational (BICS) and academic language acquisition (CALP). In Kindergarten we follow an alternating day model. Students are instructed in Spanish on Monday, Wednesday and Friday and in English on Tuesday and Thursday. In First grade we use a 50-50 model, ten day cycle with alternating days. In grades 2 - 4 we follow an alternating half day model for alternating 1 or 2 week cycles so that students are equally exposed to all content areas in both languages. In the half day model students receive instruction in one language in the morning and another language in the afternoon. In the grades 5th - 8th we use a full day language distribution with alternating two week cycles (two weeks in English and two weeks in Spanish. 5  The Literacy Intervention program is a pull-out program that schedules students in small groups (homogeneous) or in one-to-one. The students are scheduled from two periods per week to four periods per week, as needed. The SETSS program is both a pull out and a push in as indicated on the IEPs. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our model exceeds the mandated minutes for ENL instruction. All classroom teachers are bilingual teachers, most with bilingual extensions. We teach all subject matter 50% of the time in Spanish and 50% of the time in English. We use strategies that our teachers have learned in their coursework (TPR, Sheltered Instruction, SIOP). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. As a 50-50 Dual Language Model our students are immersed in both English and Spanish in all content areas (Reading, Writing, Math, Science & Social Studies). We make content comprehensible and meet the demands of the Common Core in various ways: we plan for, preview and review academic vocabulary and use demonstrations and ESL strategies (rewording, repeating, slowing down speech, visuals etc.) to make content comprehensible. We use a workshop model inclusive of conferencing so our students have individual opportunities to use and rehearse academic, content specific vocabulary. We ask open ended questions in all content areas to foster opportunities for our students to discuss their understandings and their learning. We use small group work to scaffold discussions and to encourage our students to explain their insights and to work through confusions. We have an extensive supply of non-fiction books for every grade. We integrate the interactive Smart Board and other technology into all content areas to serve as visual support and offer hands-on virtual manipulatives in Math. All of our teachers are trained in Differentiated Instruction. Our units of study include intentional groupings of students to foster language development and we plan for exposure to vocabulary in all content areas. We use conference techniques to encourage conversation and rehearsal of cognitive academic language. We maintain the language of the day and use ESL strategies (for ELLs) and ESL like strategies (for SSLs) (visual supports, TPR, gestures, repetition, rewording etc) and materials in a variety of levels to make content comprehensible. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? As a Dual Language School all in-house assessments: running records, rubrics, unit tests and mid-lesson checks for understanding etc. are administered equally in both English and Spanish in all content areas. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Currently, we do not have any SIFE students, however, our plan for SIFE students includes an ATS report to see if there are any indications from prior years for special services. The student is assessed in Literacy (English and Spanish) to determine Reading levels for each language. In Writing, we assess via writing samples in English and in Spanish to determine next step strategies. We assess in Math, via baseline assessment, to determine next step strategies. The SIFE student is invited to attend our after school Title 3 program designed to strengthen the NYSESLAT modalities and we incorporate other Tier 2 interventions, as needed. The progress of this student is carefully monitored by the classroom teacher, the Literacy Team and the Educational Cabinet. b.The majority of our newcomers are found in grades 3-8. These students experience a language rich classroom environment in both English and in Spanish. Literacy is supported via shared reading, with teacher voice support, and Writing is supported with Interactive writing and Writing Workshop. Both Reading and Writing are taught in the native language until the student 6  achieves success on text level E. We introduce Reading and Writing in the second language (English for ELLs and Spanish for EPs) after the student demonstrates control over level E texts. At this point the reading strategies (voice to print match, locating known words, looking at the picture etc.) transfer and we support the students with rich book introductions and shared or guided reading. Manipulatives are used in Math and we incorporate games and opportunities to rehearse academic language. Interactive Smart Boards (in each classroom) provide visual support throughout each content area. All newcomers are invited to attend our after school Title 3 program for language development in English. If we had a newcomer in a testing grade they would receive testing accommodations for extended time as indicated by the Principal. d. Our long term ELL students receive testing accommodations for extended time and are invited to attend our Title 3 after school program for English language development. Our long term ELL-SWD are serviced as per their IEPs. They are also invited to attend the Title3 after school program for English language development. Supports within the classrooms continue as needed. e.Our former ELLs are encouraged to attend our Title 3 after school program to continue their support in English language development. Our former ELLs receive testing accommodations for extended time and depending on need, may be in a Tier 2 intervention group. Supports within the classrooms continue as needed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We differentiate our instructional strategies for ELL-SWD as indicated on their IEPs. All classroom teachers, inclusive of Special Education teachers, have been trained in differentiation. All units of study in the content areas are designed for differentiation using Universal Design for Learning (UDL) guidelines. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We have a self-contained K/1 Special Education class representing our most restrictive environment. The self-contained class follows our 50-50 language policy and the rigorous curriculum for the grade in all content areas. We will have 4 ICT classes in grades K, 1st, 5th & 8th. This class follows the same rigorous curriculum and the same language policy as our General Education grade classes. The 5th & 8th grade ICT classes are departmentalized with the Special Education teacher traveling with the ICT class to 2 or 4 content area teachers (Literacy, Math, Science & Social Studies). We have ELL students with IEPs in our general education classes. Some receive SETSS pull-out program that services 9 ELL-SWD from Kindergarten to 8th grade. This program is conducted in the language specified on the IEPs by a bilingual SETSS teacher. These students also follow our language distribution for English and for Spanish. We will use scheduling flexibility for all of our ELL students to achieve testing accommodations during Measures of Student Learning baseline and benchmark exams as well as all standardized state exam. We use instructional flexibility (based on NYSESLAT data) to target modalities during our after school Title 3 program. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Ell students, depending on need, receive intervention from a Reading Teacher who works with small groups of no more than 5 students per group and one-on-one. The schedule for groups varies, depending on need, from one 40 minute period per week to four forty minute periods per week. The groups and the schedule are created after reviewing baseline data for Reading and for Writing. This intervention service is also available for our EP students. Our classroom teachers identify students in need of intervention and meets with small groups as needed using flexible grouping on the grade. Students also work on iReady for further individualized support. In Science and Social Studies our teachers are individually conferencing and supporting students based on individual needs. We offer ELL student’s additional support via our Title 3 program that is offered on Wednesdays. The focus of the Title 3 program is to promote English language development in listening, speaking, reading and writing which will impact on each student's performance on formative and summative assessments. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 7  We will not be adding new programs this upcoming year, however, based on data gathered we will be revamping our Academic Support program by inviting students to participate in cycles based on identified needs in an effort to maximize impact. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We will not discontinue any services for ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELL students have equal access to all school programs. We have two sports programs offered before school . These programs are taught in Spanish and are available for both ELLs and EPs twice a week for 1.5hours. We have a Title 3 program dedicated to ELL and Former ELL students. The program meets one time per week for one hour. Our Literacy Intervention program has equal access for ELLs and EPs. All school activities coordinated by parents (Carnival, Movie Night, Field day, auction) have equal access for ELLs and EPs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We have a Smart Board in each classroom K-8. The smartboard is used interactively with students to serve as both a visual and a manipulative support. We have extensive libraries (guided, independent by level and genre) in English and in Spanish in each classroom. In addition we have a book room with addition texts (Literature circle, full class sets, independent by level, author studies, genres) in English and in Spanish that teachers use throughout the year to refresh their libraries and to support units of study. We have one Math program for grades K-8, Go Math, and then have developed a second Math curriculum focusing on mathematical word problems. The programs are aligned with the CCLS and Next Generation Standards and both are in English and in Spanish and revamping to adapt to the new Next Generation Standards. Math programs have workbooks in English and in Spanish, assessments in both languages as well as virtual manipulatives for the Smart Board. We have computers in each classroom and carts of computers on wheels (COWs) for full class use. All content area materials in Science and Social Studies are available in English and in Spanish and we use multileveled content area texts to support multiple entry points. We have a Library stocked with books in English and in Spanish and we have a supplemental book room to support classroom libraries in English and in Spanish. In each classroom, we have on-line access to Encyclopedia Britanica with Spanish translations available for academic vocabulary. This on-line access is also available for our students at home. We have identified numerous web-sites in English and in Spanish for our Smart Board use and for students to explore at home. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We are a 50-50 Dual Language program. All content areas are taught in both English and Spanish in all grades K-8. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our required service support is given by a bilingual Guidance Counselor, a bilingual SETSS teacher and a bilingual Speech Provider. All resources are available in English and in Spanish. IEPs are specific and service is provided as per the IEPs. We have a wide range of material in Literacy that is leveled and our SETSS teacher has a fully stocked library of leveled texts. We aggregated a chart to incorporate F&P levels, Lexile Levels, and DRA levels and grade levels so our SETSS teacher is consistently aware of grade band parameters. Our bilingual Guidance Counselor services mandated students as per their IEPs as does our bilingual Speech Provider. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We have a Smart Board/projection system in each classroom K-8 as well as our Library and Auditorium. The smartboard/projection system is used interactively with students to serve as both a visual and a manipulative support. We have extensive libraries (guided, independent by level and genre) in English and in Spanish in each classroom. In addition we have a book room with addition texts (Literature circle, full class sets, independent by level, author studies, genres) in English and in Spanish that teachers use throughout the year to refresh their libraries and to support units of study. We have computers in each classroom and carts of computers on wheels (COWs) for full class use in rooms and Library as well. 8  Students are exposed to culturally rich performances held in the Auditorium, as well as, participate in collegial sports events with not only student peers but also school staff. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have no activities in our school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year besides referral to Summer in the City ELLs Programs. For ELLs that enroll during the school year we invite them to attend our Title 3 after school program. We offer Literacy Intervention depending on need. For students in 7th and 8th grade we may identify the students for Circular 6 small group work once per week for one period. Depending on need, ELLs that enroll during the school year may receive Literacy Intervention in a small group setting or one-to-one. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We are a Dual Language school offering instruction in English and in Spanish. Spanish language instruction is further offered to students (ELLs and EPs) via the Little Red Rocket Program which is an after school program offered Monday through Friday. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a.We are a Dual Language school using a 50-50 model whereby 50% of our instruction is in English and 50% is in Spanish. For the EP students the target language is Spanish (50%) and for the Ells the target language is English (50%). The EPs and the ELLs are integrated for the entire school day b. All content areas are taught in both languages. c.Our language allocation policy varies by grade to accommodate conversational and academic language acquisition. In Kindergarten we follow an alternating day model. Students are instructed in Spanish on Monday, Wednesday and Friday and in English on Tuesday and Thursday. In First grade we use a 50-50 model, ten day cycle with alternating days. In grades 2 - 4 we follow an alternating half day model for alternating 1 or 2 week cycles so that students are equally exposed to all content areas in both languages. In the half day model students receive instruction in one language in the morning and another language in the afternoon. In the grades 5th - 8th we use a full day language distribution with alternating two week cycles (two weeks in English and two weeks in Spanish.) d.Emergent literacy is taught in the child's native language first (sequential) until the student reaches level E on leveled text reading. Once the student reaches level E we use a simultaneous model where both languages are taught at the same time. The simultaneous model is used from Level E (usually achieved at the end of Kindergarten or the beginning of first grade), through to graduation in eighth grade. 9  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All classroom teachers receive professional development from our Literacy Team (lead teachers)as well as, Generation Ready staff developer, U Lit Coach, Assessment Matters Consultant. This staff development consists of coding, calculating and analyzing running records to determine next step strategies. All classroom teachers also receive training in the design and use of rubrics in writing as well as the analysis of writing to determine emergent strategies, confusions and areas under control. Efficiently executing a balanced literacy curriculum is high priority especially focusing on a strong foundation with in K-2. Literacy professional development is ongoing throughout the year and occurs during the day at least twice a month for each teacher and during allotted Monday/Tuesday Professional Development times . All classroom teachers also receive staff development from our Math Staff Developer at least 1 to 2 times per month. The math staff developer supports all classroom teachers in the implementation of a curriculum aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. They meet with each grade band at least twice per month for approximately 3 hours. Our teachers have previously received staff development in the Danielson rubric by an ASCD consultant and continue to receive support by the Principal and Assistant Principal as they focus on increase of student engagement, rigor and assessment. This staff development is ongoing and targeted for staff development days. As a school, with the support of our Assessment Matters Consultant, we have examined the Common Core Learning Standards for ELA within grade bans and level teams. Together, they have examined the curriculum against the Common Core Learning Standards and now the Next Generation standards to identify any gaps or areas in need of improvement. We have added vocabulary development, essential questions and differentiated instructional grouping to our units of study in writing to support our ELLs in the advanced vocabulary requirement of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our Reading curriculum is extensively differentiated for each individual student inclusive of Independent Reading levels, Instructional Reading levels and individual next step strategies. The Math Staff Developer has examined the Common Core Learning Standards with each grade ban and level teams. We use fully aligned Math curricula for both the elementary and middle school classes. (Go Math). Our Math Staff Developer conducts on-going Professional Development for each teacher as they teach the curriculum. Inclusive in this work is planning for Differentiated Instruction and vocabulary development supportive of ELLs. We will continue this support throughout the year as per the staff development schedule mentioned above. The Danielson Rubric, framework for teaching, is closely tied to improving professional practice, as we implement curriculi aligned to the Standards. The Testing Coordinators attend staff development twice per year given by the NYC Assessment Implementation Director. The Guidance Counselor receives staff development from the network monthly. Paraprofessionals are included in the training during staff development days as well as trainings provided by our district office. All of our classroom teachers receive smart board support from our in-house technology coordinator. The interactive applications on the Smart Board serve to scaffold the second language learner's understandings. Our teachers have all been invited to take advantage of the training that is available on ENGAGE. Our Parent Coordinator has attended workshops in Conflict Resolution, Resources in the Community, Translation, Early Childhood Literacy, Technology, ELL strategies and Balanced Literacy. These workshops have helped our Parent Coordinator to gain more information and to be effective in her work. The training for teachers of ELLs includes ESL strategies (simplified language, Total Physical Response, slower speech) and language acquisition theories and Dual Language policies. This training is on-going and given by the Assistant Principal and Literacy Team during staff development days, extended day professional development periods and during pre and post observation conferences. As a Dual Language school we consider language in all aspects of our learning and our teaching. Our teachers have studied the CCLS and have aligned the content area curriculum to the standards. They have received professional development in the CCLS and in aligning the curricula to include differentiation in all units of study. All teachers receive on-going professional development from our Math Staff Developer and our Literacy Team to design language rich units of study aligned with the CCLS. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 0  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We have an extended day dedicated to professional development (Monday - 80 minutes). We use some of these periods to accomplish the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154. We provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. We dedicate a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies, integrating language and content instruction as well as analysis of assessments and data gathered surrounding English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers we dedicate a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies , integrating language and content instruction as well as analysis of assessments and data gathered surrounding English language learners. We keep the agendas and the attendance record for all staff development days in the Main Office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We have a dedicated extended day 40 minute period once per week for family engagement. We use this time to meet with parents (Tuesday). We do not require interpretation or translation as all of our classroom teachers are bilingual. Our teachers keep an attendance record of each parent meeting and our Assistant Principal reviews the attendance to ensure each parent has an annual individual meeting. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental involvement is a cornerstone of our school and a contributing factor to the success of Amistad. Parents participate in the governance of the school via the SLT. Early on in the school year we invite parents in for a Curriculum Night. We meet with parents in our classrooms and describe the units of study for all content areas that we will cover for the school year. We describe the homework policy and we share email addresses so the parents have an additional means of contact. These meetings are conducted in both English and Spanish. The schools website provides information for parents regarding grade level curriculum, announcements, samples and the schedule. Parents can email each teacher individually or the school via this website. Parents also support the instructional programs in the school by fund raising and partnering in the development of classroom projects and trips. Our parents design and staff our field day each year and they design and staff a carnival. Parents organize movie nights for our students and families and are often in classrooms helping. Bilingual parents and Spanish speaking parents help staff the lunchroom and also fund and staff recess activities. Parents also fund materials (Time For Kids) from their budget. All workshops are offered with simultaneous translations. We have a Parent Teacher Association and each year we hold elections for the PTA. We have two slots for each officer's position, one of which is earmarked for a Spanish speaking parent. The Parents' Association meets two times per month. One of the meetings is in the morning, during school time and the other meeting is in the early evening (6:30). The varied time slots make it convenient for parents to attend and all meetings have simultaneous translations. Simultaneous translations are done through the use of an audio transmitter with receivers for up to forty parents. All announcements and minutes from meetings are translated into Spanish to ensure that parents of ELL students stay informed. Our Parent Teacher Association has a Yahoo account with bilingual notifications. The Parents also offer parent to parent workshops where they disseminate information from the President's Council of District 6. These meetings have simultaneous translations. For the last four years we have had a parent-to-parent ESL class. We have a Blackboard system for school-wide phone calls to parents. All blackboard phone calls are in English and in Spanish. Our classroom teachers are all bilingual so Parent/Teacher meetings are conducted in the language of comfort for the parent. We evaluate the needs of our parents via ongoing conversations with our bilingual Parent Coordinator. We also have our bilingual Guidance Counselor attend one PTA meeting per month so he continues to be aware of parental concerns. We 1  also evaluate the needs of our parents by giving surveys after each workshop. The surveys help us to understand what worked, what we can improve and also helps us gather ideas for future workshops. Our parent involvement activities address the needs of our parents because they are all offered in English and in Spanish and they cover a broad range of material. Our school is designed so that both Spanish and English are celebrated and our parents are guaranteed to communicate in their language of choice. Also, as we are a K-8 school, the transition from Elementary to Middle School is seamless. The Guidance Counselor supports this transition by inviting all Amistad parents to a Middle School tour. During this tour the Guidance Counselor describes the Middle School application process. The Guidance Counselor makes himself available by individual appointments to parents to assist in the application process. Once the application process is complete the Guidance Counselor follows up with classroom teachers to inquire if any students are having difficulty with the new semi-departmentalized schedule. The Guidance Counselor schedules meeting with students accordingly. The transition to high school is supported by our Guidance Counselor. In September we schedule a meeting in the early evening for the parents of our 7th and 8th grade students. During this meeting we show a power point presentation about the High School application process and we distribute flyers (in English and in Spanish) with open house information. We also distribute information on web-sites that are available to help parents navigate the High School application process. All information that is delivered to parents is in English and in Spanish. The Guidance Counselor schedules students for the Specialized High School exams and schedules auditions for Performing Art Schools. The Guidance Counselor arranges for classroom teachers to work with students on their portfolios for schools in the Arts. The Guidance Counselor meets with each student individually, to help the student generate a list of schools to visit with their parents. This list is generated according to students' interests, grades and attendance. The Guidance Counselor is available, by appointment, to meet with parents and students to help fill out the applications and once received to help parents edit their choices. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Robin Edmonds, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Amistad Dual Language School School DBN: 06M311 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Robin Edmonds Olga Ramos Eulalia Lugo Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Anabel Capellan ENL/Bilingual Teacher Vera Moore Parent Janilda Valentin Teacher/Subject Area Zaira Wallace Teacher/Subject Area - - Coach Coach Juan Bello School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/20/18 06/20/18 06/20/18 06/20/18 06/20/18 06/20/18 06/20/18 - - 06/20/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 06m311 School Name: Amistad Dual Language School Superintendent: Manuel Ramirez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Eulalia Olga Lugo Ramos Parent Coordinator Assistant Principal yes yes yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use the Home Language Survey and our informal oral interview to determine our translation and interpretation needs. We also examine the Home Language report in ATS. As a Dual Language school in English and in Spanish our translation and interpretation needs focus on English and Spanish. This year, we have a need for English and Spanish and the data indicates that we have no other language needs. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 5  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish -Japanese Soninke - 154 310 0- 1- 33 67 0- .22- 155 308 1- 1- 33 66 .22- .22- 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Annual handbooks - newsletters- calendars - parent-teacher conference announcements - , parent-teacher association announcements - prior to each PTA meeting, after-school program information - New York State testing dates - curriculum overview - during Curriculum Night - September, letters from the school leadership - , IEP meeting dates - yearly as needed yearly Twice a year monthly Translation is done by in house Biliterate staff members such as Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Literacy Team and classroom teachers. Both families having indicated Japanese and Soninke languages also are fully fluent in English. 6  - - - as needed beginning of the school year and prior to testing dates, ongoing prior to each meeting. - - - - - - 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Curriculum night - September , parent teacher meetings - November/March/May Publishing parties - as scheduled, school trips - as scheduled , parent conferences - as needed, guidance counselor calls - as needed, school tours - ongoing throughout the year, Honor Roll Breakfasts - per semester, school performance - June - - - As required - - - Translation is done by in house Biliterate staff members such as Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Literacy Team and classroom teachers. - - - 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have a Blackboard system for school-wide phone calls to parents in which calls/text messages are sent out in both English and Spanish. Our PTA also has a Yahoo account with bilingual notifications where information is also disseminated. Additional IO / Pupil Path will be used for messaging home. The system creates the message in the home language listed in ATS. 7  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Utilize technology to distribute messages regarding Chancellor's Reg A-663. Staff will receive professional development on the IO / Pupil Path system in order to create translated messages home in the home language listed on ATS. For other communication, staff will receive information about in-house and DOE resources for translation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We translate all documents. We collect data on primary language/languages spoken by each parent. Translation and interpretation services are available and parents have been made aware of these services. We translate all written material in-house so we have no need for an outside vendor. We use in-house simultaneous interpretation for all meetings so we have no need for an outside vendor. All signs in the building are in English and in Spanish and our parents are provided with a translated Parent's Bill of Rights, translated Parent's Guide to Language Access, translated Safety Plan and a Language ID Guide at the security desk and the main office Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our parent coordinator who is certified in translation monitors feedback from parents via surveys after each simultaneous translation event. 8 
