2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 06M349 School Name: HARBOR HEIGHTS Principal: MONICA KLEHR 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Harbor Heights Middle School 06M349 310600010349 6-8 School Number (DBN): 306 Fort Washington Ave. Room 414 NY, NY 10033 (212)568-6052 (212)568-7959 Phone Number: Monica Klehr Fax: mklehr@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Monica Klehr Elisa Mogena Jazmin Alvarez Elisa Mogena Jacqueline Baez N/A Alex Fermin Geographical District: 06 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Manuel Ramirez Superintendent: 4360 Broadway NY, NY 10032 Mramire4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (917)521-3757 Phone Number: (917) 521-3797 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Avenue NY, NY ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (212)356-3883 Phone Number: (917)339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Monica Klehr Elisa Mogena Jazmin Diaz Alvarez AydeeCabrera Jacqueline Baez N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Arisleyda Beato Member/ parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Nancy Campos Martinez Jeisa Fernanda Velez Wanda Rivero Erika Klein Pedro Rodriguez Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ parent Member/ parent Member/ parent Member/ teacher Member/ teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of the Harbor Heights Middle School Family is to graduate successful and caring citizens of the world. We engage newly arrived immigrant students in the development of academic, linguistic and cross-cultural skills necessary for achievement in high school and beyond. We value the academic strengths and social experiences our students bring to Harbor Heights and build upon them as we introduce and guide students to master the New York State core curriculum and life-long learning skills at the same time they are learning academic English. We recognize and promote active engagement of school staff, families and diverse communities in order to reach our goals. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Harbor Heights is a middle school with 125 students from grade 6 through grade 8. The school population comprises 100% Hispanic students. Of 1,256 schools in the city, Harbor Heights has the second highest percentage of English Language Learners in school and the second highest percentage of English Language Learners in poverty in school year 2017-2018. The student body includes 91% English language learners, 20% SIFE students and 1% special education students. Boys account for 51% of the students enrolled and girls account for 49%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 was 96.0%. We partner with the Washington Heights/Inwood YMYHA to provide a comprehensive after school program for students in grades 6-8 Mondays-Fridays from 2:20-5:20 pm as part of the mayor's city-wide initiative: School's Out NYC (SONYC) program. Activities include academic and enrichment programs. We also partner with the Childrens' Arts and Science Workshop in our community to provide support for immigrant families. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our student population has high levels of second language learning needs. Over 90% of our students enter our school at the Entering level of English as a New Language Proficiency. In addition, the majority of these students also enter our school lacking basic math skills such as single digit multiplication and division mastery. The SIFE students are reading below a third grade level in their own native language of Spanish. We provide a Dual Language Education Program in compliance with New York State Part 154 Regulations. To address these needs, our priorities are aligned with our district's priorities of executing formative assessments throughout the year, expanding learning opportunities in extended day programs and in summer school and providing our teachers with timely and effective feedback on exemplary pedagogy for this high needs population. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. School leaders and staff made the most progress this year of consistently embedding high expectations in all aspects of school culture, focusing on the Danielson Framework for Teaching, college and career readiness, and successfully partnering with families for mutual understanding of those expectations. 89% of survey responders rated our supportive environment for learning at 80% compared to a city rating of 75%. Our key areas of focus this year is on overall growth on the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math exams and diminishing level one performance on these same exams, in alignment with our Community School District Six goals. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M349 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 129 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 98.0% % Attendance Rate 97.7% % Reduced Lunch 85.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.0% 100.0% 0.0% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 12.25 0% 36% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) No N/A N/A N/A 95.9% 2.3% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 2 18% 6.8 ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 6.5% N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) 20.1% 22% Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No No No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes No N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers’ pedagogy consistently provides scaffolds to ensure students experience rigorous instruction and engage in high-level thinking and discussions. Strategies and extensions produce meaningful work products, however, they are not always strategically planned. As a result, opportunities for extended learning and demonstration of high level student thinking, participation, and ownership, are inconsistently reflected across most classrooms. All curricula are aligned to the Common Core State Standards and integrate the instructional shifts. Teachers use data and student work to plan and refine academic tasks and curricula. The well aligned coherent curricula results in academic tasks that are designed to be engaging, rigorous and accessible; and promote college and career readiness for all students; including English Language Learners and students with disabilities. As newcomers to the country, our student population has high levels of second language learning challenges in relation to the Next Generation Learning Standards in English Language Arts for which all New York state public schools are held accountable. Over 90% of our students enter our school at the Entering level of English as a New Language Proficiency. The SIFE students are reading below a third grade level in their native language of Spanish. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  On the 2018 State NYSESLAT exam, 70% of test takers made at least one level of progress while 30% remained at the same achievement level as the previous year. Consistent growth on the NYSESLAT exam from year to year for our ELLs is our area of focus as we know this achievement will facilitate their progress towards meeting state standards on English Language Arts exams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 80% of our students in grades 6-8 will make at least one level of progress on the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Schedule and hold weekly meetings for the Language Arts teacher team to plan administration of the periodic assessments and subsequent instructional strategies Language Arts teachers Sept. 2018-June2019 LA Team and administration LA team members will all attend IRLA professional development sessions provided by the American Reading Company Language Arts teachers August 2018-June 2019 LA Team and administration Lead teachers will be assigned to develop and implement the continuing SIFE BRIDGES plan to include block scheduling for homogeneous grouping, teacher classroom intervistitations and mentoring relationships and assessment procedures. Language Arts teachers August 2018-June 2019 Administration and teachers Periodic IRLA data with established reading acquisition goals for each student, will be shared with regular school day and after school program staff across all content areas to inform instruction October 2018-June 2019 All regular school day teachers and after school tutors Administration of school and after school program (SONYC) and Language Arts teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be provided with free English as a New Language classes in order to support their children's learning at home. Parents will be provided with on-going workshops, beginning in August Back to School orientation meetings and at the Back to School Night meeting in September that address the topic of the CCLS as it pertains to second language learning and reading acquisition, informed by the IRLA. Principal Klehr, AP Reyes, Parent Coordinator Brito and classroom teachers will be responsible to plan and deliver these informational workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School and central staff; CUNY Graduate Center Bridges Program provided by DOE DELLs; the master schedule will include two periods per week for each teacher to attend collaborative content team meetings; lead teacher in school will provide professional development on the IRLA Framework. Per session funds will allow teachers to meet with students in small group tutorial sessions after school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February, 2019, the LA team will have administered the IRLA to all students to compare the data with the baseline assessments administered in September and October to measure if student performance is increasing or decreasing as a result of goal related activities to determine if the school is on course to meet the annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Independent Reading Level Assessment (IRLA) and shared assessment report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? School leaders and staff consistently embed high expectations in all aspects of school culture, focusing on the Danielson Framework for Teaching, specifically in Domain 2, college and career readiness, and successfully partner with families for mutual understanding of those expectations. Systems and structures that support a culture of high expectations, responsibilities, and professional collaboration for staff, students, and families, effectively communicate mutual accountabilities amongst all stakeholders for achieving the expectations of the Common Core Learning Standard. The 100 Schools Project of the Jewish Board of Family and Children's Services, Inc. in consultation with the School Based Mental Health program in the Office of School Health (OSH), New York City Dept. of Education, reports that half of all mental health and substance use conditions start before age 14 and that 28% of students report sadness and 85 report attempting suicide, and yet, less than one out of five of those who need specialist mental health services receive them. In regular guidance counseling sessions and advisory group meetings, our students report the following challenges they face in order to be prepared for productive learning in school: aggression and fighting amongst their school-aged peers in and out of school; bullying; behavioral problems at home and in school; unsuitable housing and domestic abuse. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our overall student attendance rate will improve from the year to date rate on October 19, 2018 of 92.6% to at least 96%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers and administration will study descriptions of highly effective of classroom practice in the Danielson Framework Domains 2 and 3 Daily and weekly attendance data will be analyzed by school attendance team to identify students of concern and implement supportive practices for those students teachers and administration September 2018 teachers and administration students wilthlow attendance rates September 2018- June 2019 attendance team Teachers will collaboratively make a mid-year evaluation of individual student behaviors to assess the supportive environment for all teachers and administration February 2019 teachers and administration Teachers and administration will revisit the individual student behavior logs and incentive charts to make adjustments and identify shared students of concern 3b – Parent and Family Engagement teachers and administration February 2019 teachers and administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Provide all families in the school a sequence of informational workshops to include the topics of: anger management; parenting skills; awareness of adolescent developmental stages and behaviors; maintaining a respectful climate within and outside of school; mental health services for families and social services for families. Provide all families with monthly calendars and social/emotional and academic growth progress reports so parents can record and are notified of upcoming workshops, assignments and dates to check on their children's progress with teachers, tutors and counselors. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 100 Schools Project Coach from the Jewish Board, Guidance Counselor, Dean of Conduct, . 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the school attendance rate will exceed 95%. (92.7% as of 02.28.19) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Daily and long term attendance data; ilog entries; parent engagement agendas and attendance records; attendance team agendas and notes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards X (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed N/A N/A X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers participate in structured, inquiry based professional development, focused on the school’s instructional goals. Team collaborations provide a vehicle for teachers to have input on key decisions about the curricula and teaching practices. The work of teacher teams has resulted in school-wide efforts to effectively promote the school goals, including the implementation of the Common Core Learning Standards, and contribute to improved teacher pedagogy and student learning. Teacher teams need to establish and routinely utilize research based protocols to study student work towards curriculum design and improvement. In addition, the teams need to make this process publicly evident. Our teachers need support in understanding dual language instructional strategies in order to employ them on a more consistent basis across all classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a team of teachers from three different content areas, along with the principal will have collectively established a new school-wide Language Allocation Policy, including specific instructional strategies employed across all classrooms as documented in agendas, teacher professional development portfolios and classroom observation records. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The professional development committee will produce a professional development plan for the year to include activities with the Learning Partners Program teachers and SONYC tutors September 2018 School and SONYC Administration, PD committee Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) will engage in a continuous series of inquiry and practice cycles that include collaborative lesson planning, peer intervisitations during classroom instruction, sharing of intervisitation reflections and student work products and subsequent and informed lesson plan adjustments teachers bi-weekly, October 2018-June 2019 PD committee and administration Teachers will assemble personal professional portfolios with the PLC documentation for on-going review by administration teachers Teachers describe academic expectations and CCLS to parents at Back to School Night and during Open School Week, when parents are invited into classrooms while instruction is taking place. parents October 2018-June 2019 Sept. 20 2018 and Nov. 27, 2018 administration Teachers and administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers describe academic expectations and CCLS to parents at Back to School Night in September 2018 and during Open School Week in October 2018, when parents are invited into classrooms while instruction is taking place Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration; PD committee; parent coordinator, SONYC after school administration and CSD 6 support staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, the new Language Allocation Policy will be clearly understood by all members of school staff and evidence of shared teaching strategies will be found in teacher portfolios. Our school will have hosted a learning visit from the two other dual language school teams in our Learning Partners Triad. (We have hosted two visits from the LPP Triad. We have been informed by the superintendent that for the year 2019-2020 we will maintain our student selection criteria and remain a transitional bilingual education program school.) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. individual teacher professional portfolios; agendas from LPP meetings and school visits. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x X x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our student population has high levels of second language learning needs. Over 90% of our students enter our school at the Entering level of English as a New Language Proficiency. In addition, the majority of these students also enter our school lacking basic math skills such as single digit multiplication and division mastery. The SIFE students are reading below a third grade level in their own native language of Spanish. For the 2016-2017 school year, New York State identified our school as a Local Assistance Plan school for failing to make AYP in Science for three years (2012, 2013, 2014) for Hispanic, and Limited English Proficient students and Educationally Disadvantaged students. In the 2017-2018 school year our school decreased the number of students performing at level 1 by 1% in Mathematics, compared to the district's decrease of the same by 2%. The district goal is to increase this percentage decrease of level 1 results and we need to align with our district goals. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in the 8th grade will show progress in Mathematics and Science as indicated in a 5% decrease of level 1 students on the 2019 state assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal and Assistant Principal (AP) Principal, AP and teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, teachers teachers September 2018 teachers September, 2018-June 2019 September, 2018 -June 2019 Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Principal and Assistant Principal introduce student and teacher assessment portfolio expectations and evaluation rubrics with a time-line of effective feedback from administration. During bi-monthly Monday Professional Development sessions, teachers engage in PLC cycles, culminating in portfolio documentation Teachers continue to develop a series of Performance Based Assessment Tasks (PBATs) for students to complete that will be entered into the student portfolios to show progressions of learning with teacher, peer and self assessment entries teachers and students Professional development for teachers will focus on developing a shared understanding of school-wide instructional priorities aligned to strengths and areas for growth; implementing a cycle of observation with effective and timely feedback to improve teaching and learning throughout the school year. teachers September, 2018 -June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, and lead teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. All parents will receive information regarding the expectations for the student PBAT portfolios at the Back to School Night Orientation and then again at three subsequent Parent/Teacher conferences in the fall and spring. Student portfolios will be presented to parents during two student-led Parent/Teacher conferences Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, AP, teachers, CSD 6 superintendency guidance and PD support Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, our school will have a comprehensive intervention support plan to address students' math needs that includes expanded learning opportunities. ( Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. intervention support plan, attendance in expanded learning programs and individual student progress reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our 2017-2018 Learning Environment survey indicates that parents/guardians of LEP students are not regularly participating in school-designed programs and events to observe the instructional program nor have they volunteered time to support this school (by volunteering in classrooms or helping with school-wide events). Teachers report the need for more communication with parents about student performance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase on questions relating to effective communication between the school and parents as measured by the 2019 NYC School Survey results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Designate guidance counselor and parent coordinator as project coordinators to assist the coach in delivering and integrating the program into the regular school, extended day and parent communities. Provide all regular school day and after school faculty a sequence of informational workshops to include the topics of: student anger management; teaching/counseling skills; awareness of adolescent developmental stages and behaviors; maintaining a respectful climate within and outside the classrooms and mental health services for students, families and educators. Provide all families in the school a sequence of informational workshops to include the topics of: anger management; parenting skills; awareness of adolescent developmental stages and behaviors; maintaining a respectful climate within and outside of school; mental health services for families and social services for families school and CBO leadership school and CBO leadership all parents June 2018 school and CBO leadership July 2018- school and CBO leadership July 2018-November 2019 Parent coordinator, SONYC director, principal, PA leadership Provide all families with monthly calendars and social/emotional and academic growth progress reports so parents can record and are notified of upcoming workshops, assignments and dates to check on all parents, school and SONYC staff July 2018-June 2019 Parent coordinator, SONYC director, principal, PA leadership their children's progress with teachers, tutors and counselors. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. YM &YWHA of Washington Heights/Inwood SONYC Program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, principal, PA leadership, SONYC, Title I and tax levy funds to provide refreshments at all parent events 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 70% of parents will attend P/T conferences as measured by attendance records. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Core team; staff development and parent workshop agendas/minutes and attendance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During regular and extended day programs Small group and Computer –assisted one-on-one Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Decoding and comprehension skill baseline assessments in both ENL and NLAusing the IRLA Reflex math program ST Math Program baseline diagnostics Decoding and comprehension skill baseline assessments in both ENL andNLAusing IRLA Decoding and comprehension skill baseline assessments in both ENL andNLAusing IRLA Referrals from parents, support staff and all BRIDGES ELAfor Low Literacy SIFE Reflex math program ST Math Program BRIDGESELAfor Low LiteracySIFE RIGOR(ReadingInstructional GoalsforOlderReaders) BRIDGESELAfor Low LiteracySIFE one-on-one counseling RIGOR(ReadingInstructional GoalsforOlderReaders) Small group and Small group and Computer –assisted one-on-one During regular and extended day programs During regular and extended day programs Computer–assistedone-on-one Small group and Computer–assistedone-on-one During regular and extended day programs one-on-one smallgroup During regular and extended dayprograms 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33 smallgroup counseling familycounseling Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) advisorsand teachers familycounseling and referral services ProfessioanlDevelopment and support from the 100 Schools Project coach 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 43 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Provide students with uniforms, school materials, special field trip and graduation expenses, as well as case management services provided by school partner Childrens' Arts and Sciences Workshop. (CASW) Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All staff is currently highly qualified or actively enrolled in credit- bearing coursework towards full certification. We intend to retain these teachers by providing the professional development described below and ensuring teacher voice in decision making processes in the school. In addition, we will provide new teachers with experienced teacher mentors and will provide experienced teachers with professional development leadership opportunities. Principal and Assistant Principal will attend all summer job fairs and will work throughout the summer to identify and interview new teacher candidates. All teacher assignments are made based on proper state certification in subject areas and in compliance with CR Part 154-A. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our common branch, subject area teachers, assistant principal, guidance counselor, parent coordinator and secretary all engage in a wide variety of differentiated professional development actives throughout the school year provided by a combination of CSD 6, Manhattan Borough Field Support Services Center, NYCDOE Division of Students with Disabilities and ELLs, professional consultants and in-house teaching staff to include the following: 1. ADVANCE teacher development training using the Danielson Framework for teacher effectiveness 2. Professional Learning Communities (Looking at Student Work as a result of MOSLs and PBATs in alignment with the NY State CCSS) that meet once a week for 45 minutes throughout the entire school year 3. DOE source systems (ATS and STARS) training every other month for 7 hours for secretary 4. Teachers take part in 4 full day sessions per year working closely with the new CCSS curricula materials: Scholastic Code X and Pearson's CMP3 Mathematics curricula 5. Specific advisory curriculum training during faculty conference meetings for all of our teachers and our bilingual guidance counselor at least every other month for 1-2 hours because the advisory program they instruct guides students in orientation to middle school procedures, expectations and protocols as well as high school expectations, requirements and choices. Teachers are trained in strategies and methodologies for individual student academic and social affective goal setting. 6. Principal and Assistant principal attend bi-monthly professional development trainings provided by office of superintendent addressing effective practices for APPR. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  7. Twice-monthly workshops on mental health literacy and supports provided by 100 Schools Project coach. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. All teachers are educated on the ADVANCE system of Measure of Student Learning (MOSL) and have a choice in the type of student assessments that are used throughout the year. Our school formed and trained a MOSL committee that communicated on regular basis with all teaching staff . In content teams, teachers select baseline and interim assessments and provide reasoning for sub groups of their students. to the administration in alignment with tenure requirements. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 97,803 0 0 0 15,182 0 1,236,665 Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X N/A N/A N/A X N/A X Column B Section Reference(s) section 5A-5E N/A N/A N/A section 5A-5E N/A section 5A-5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Harbor Heights Middle School Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Harbor Heights Middle School's Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, Harbor Heights Middle School will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central  office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help.    School-Parent Compact (SPC) Harbor Heights Middle School School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum [ Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; School will provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Harbor Heights Middle School-Parent Compact II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities Parent Responsibilities: monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sport and/or quality family time; encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by promptly reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child WE AGREE TO WORK TOGETHER, TO THE BEST OF OUR ABILITIES, AS EDUCATORS AND PARENTS TO FULFILL OUR COMMON GOAL OF PROVIDING FOR THE SUCCESSFUL EDUCATION OF OUR CHILDREN. Monica R. Klehr Tania Lopez School Principal Parent Association President III. Student Responsibilities Harbor Heights Middle School Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully and always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our students are recent arrivals to the country with three years or less in a US school. 91% of them are English Language Learners at the Entering level of English as a New Language proficiency. In addition, the majority of these students also enter our school lacking basic math skills such as single digit multiplication and division mastery. 20% of our students are SIFE students, reading below a third grade level in their own native language of Spanish. These students need to be offered multiple supplemental learning opportunities in our school. Using the Independent Reading Level Assessment IRLA, our teachers will identify subgroups of Emerging to Expanding Proficiency ELL students in grades 7 and 8 to receive small group advanced literacy curricula through the theatre arts for an additional opportunity to master basic literacy skills that are required to access the CCLS content during the regular school day. At the end of each weekly session, the students will be re-assessed. The English Enrichment Theatre Program with a supervisor (Necessary as this is the only program held at this time) will be held for 29 consecutive weeks on Saturdays from 10:00 am -1:00 pm with a target start date of October 6, 2018. The language of instruction will be in English as the targeted students are those advancing through the English language learning progressions. Two teachers from the People's Theatre Project, a contracted NYCDOE Arts Partner, will provide the English Enrichment Theatre Program in which students choose their own social injustice to tackle from a broad framework for each grade level cluster. Teaching Artists and students work together to shift power inthe teaching and learning dynamics wherein students are empowered to speak up andtake ownership of their learning experience. Included are built-in curricular opportunities to bolster student agency stage, encouraging them to direct the shape of the creative actions. A variety of learning styles are addressed to honor the many ways students are intelligent and to move student interests and aspirations from margin to center. Teaching Artists use diverse cultural referents as exemplars; creating culturally responsive classroom environments and learning communities Students devise, organize and present creative actions in their local communities and ongoing reflective dialogue accompanies and supports active experimentation and concrete experience. The People’s Forum is a dialogic space in which students engage with other PTP students as they progress in their devised work, moving seamlessly through Kolb’s Cycle of Experiential Learning (Abstract Conceptualization, Active Experimentation, Concrete Experience and Reflective Observation). This targeted group of students do not include any with IEPs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The English Enrichment Theatre Program teachers engage in a wide variety of differentiated professional development actives throughout the school year provided by the People's Theatre Project educational leadership, with an established calendar of theatre arts and ENL pedagogy professional development. Principal Klehr and teacher leader, Crystal Alexander Thomas will also lead professional development for the teaching artists in order to bring the curricula in alignment with the currently established BRIDGES SIFE program during the regular school day. The remaining school staff all engage in bi-weekly Professional Learning Communities' for understanding and commitments to a school-wide language development policy; theory of action for language learning; the development and execution of language appropriate Measures of Student Learning (MOSLs); analysis of student work produced as a result of MOSLs and systemization of PLC work cycle towards continuous improvement. These PLCs will meet every Monday for 80 minutes throughout the school year. Title III allocations will not be used to provide professional development. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent Involvement in our school consists of a wide variety of activities to assure parents are active participants in the life of the school, and feel welcomed, valued, and connected to each other, to school staff and to what students are learning and doing in class. All parent activities are conducted in the parents' native language of Spanish by our academic and non academic staff; written translation services are provided by our bilingual (Spanish/English) school secretary: a. Parents are interviewed as part of the school’s annual Quality Review and parent surveys are a vital part of the School’s annual Environmental Survey process. b. Parents take part in on-going workshop series on the following topics, that are facilitated by our own bilingual teaching staff: Second Language Learning; Content area support at home; internet usage and NYC Teach system orientation and usage. c. The school, with the assistance of the district and parents, educates its teachers, pupil services 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities personnel, principals and other staff, in how to reach out to, communicate with and work with parents as equal partners, in the value and utility of contributions of parents, and in ways to implement and coordinate parent programs and build ties between parents and the schools by: providing teachers with professional development regarding the most effective techniques in involving parents through respectful conversations; involving parents in the regular activities of the school and involving parents in the Student of the Month assemblies. 2. Our school partners with the Columbia Presbyterian Hospital School of Social Work and the Childrens Arts and Science Workshop to provide educational workshops for parents on a variety of topics addressing adolescent socio-emotional needs and the instructional workshops described in 1b. All parent activities are conducted in the parents' native language of Spanish; no translation services are necessary. 3. An evaluation is conducted at two spring PTA meetings providing opportunity for parents to give feedback and suggestions on school improvement strategies. The survey is the responsibility of the Parent Coordinator. The Parent Coordinator, along with members of the PA Executive board organizes the parent feedback and presents the findings to the principal for review and consideration. Parents have the opportunity to provide feedback on topics such as: instruction, school-to-home communication, guidance services, academic intervention services and security. All parent activities are conducted in the parents' native language of Spanish. 4. Our parents have communicated to the school that they need instruction in ways to support their students’ academic learning at home and in guidance to high school and beyond. To this end, we provide the workshop series described above in 1b. All parent activities are conducted in the parents' native language of Spanish and refreshments are provided as incentives in the evening. This year we will also provide our parents with classes in the following areas: English as a Second Language and Physical Fitness. Parents are notified of all activities in a monthly calendar and monthly informational mailings provided in the home language. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 06 School Name Harbor Heights Middle School Borough Manhattan School Number 349 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Monica Klehr Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Roberto Gomar Teacher/Subject Area Arturo de la Cruz, HLA Teacher/Subject Area n/a Related-Service Provider n/a Superintendent n/a Assistant Principal Edgar Reyes Coach n/a School Counselor N/A Parent Laura Canela Parent Coordinator Jacqueline Brito Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 7 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 163 Total number of ELLs 151 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 92.64% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 1 1 7 1 1 8 1 1 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 3 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses the Independent Reading Level Assessment (IRLA) to assess the early literacy skills of our students in English and most of our students are at least 5-6 years below grade level. We also use the Multilingual Literacy SIFE Screener (MLS) assessment to assess students' home language abilities. Our students’ lack of reading and writing skills in their L1 interfere with the transitioning of these skills to L2 as evidenced by our students lack of ability to perform well on state assessments in English reading and writing. It is imperative that we look closely at closing this literacy gap in their native language if we hope to improve performance in ELA. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our language arts team is proficient in quickly assessing students for both language skills in their classrooms multiple times throughout the year (minimum three times per year). 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs using the following tools: The Principal Performance Review, the School Quality Snapshot, the ELL periodic assessment, the MLS, the School Quality Review and the School Environmental Survey 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We provide extended learning opportunities for struggling students (our lowest third) for multiple chances at success with tutorial programs and small group intervention sessions during the regular school day. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] n/a 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Of 90 students with NYSESLAT results from the Spring 2016 administration, 22 progressed one proficiency level; 10 progressed 2 proficiency levels; 7 advanced three proficiency levels; 4 remained at the same proficiency level and 0 students regressed any proficiency level. 13.3% of these students attained the Commanding level. As our students progress from 6-8th grades, they are performing better on the NYSESLAT. Students continue to make slow but steady growth. Both of our 6th grade classes and 7th grade classes are considered entering classes. In the 8th grade, two classes are considered entering classes and 1 class is considered transitioning. The results of the NYSITELL for the new arrivals are at entering level and therefore placed in the entering classes at their appropriate grade level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our full staff uses a shared Goggle doc platform to share continuous data inputs during teacher team meetings, School Leadership Team meetings and professional development sessions throughout the year. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. n/a b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Our 6-8th grade students travel together as groups in classes of 16-29 students to receive instruction from content area teachers in the following subject areas: Native Language Arts (HLA), English as a Second Language (ENL), English 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Language Arts (ELA), Math, Science, Social Studies, Advisory and Physical Education. The classes on each grade are grouped homogeneously by English Language abilities as determined on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT examinations. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Each content teacher ( Math, Social Studies and Science) is specifically assigned to teach each class in each grade in both Spanish and English. The exception is that Physical Education is taught exclusively in English and Advisory is taught exclusively in Spanish to support the ENL mandated minutes. In this way we are able to assure that each homogeneous language class receives the mandated number of minutes for the Dual Language model in each language in all content areas. Explicit ENL, ELA and HLA mandated instructional minutes are delivered 100% in the language of instruction as regular content classes by certified ENL or HLA teachers. Our entering and emerging level classes receive ENL instruction 100% of the time to support ELA content standards. Our transitional class receives 50% ENL and 50% ELA instruction. All HLA classes are delivered 100% in Spanish (HL) and the instructional units are aligned to the CCSS grade level standards. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Math, Social Studies, and Science are taught in both Spanish and English. According to a breakdown of our instructional minutes per week (and using the dual language suggested time allotments table in CR Part 154) for each leveled class for the school year, the following are the percentages that each class receives in their content area courses: The entering classes receive 50% home language content instruction and 50% English language content instruction. The transitional classes receive 50% home language content instruction and 50% English language content instruction. All class levels receive Physical Education in 100% English language instruction and they receive Advisory in 100% home language instruction. All content area teachers have been trained and use the Sheltered Instructional Observation Protocol (SIOP) approach. In the SIOP approach, instruction consists of eight components: lesson preparation, building background, comprehensible input, strategies, interaction, practice/application, lesson delivery and review/assessment. In the SIOP approach, materials are provided such as graphic organizers (for contextualizing key vocabulary, diagramming problems, writing procedures, tree map for classifying and grouping, webs, t-charts, Venn Diagrams, brace map for analyzing whole objects and parts, etc.), grouping strategies, note-taking methods, guidelines for writing content and language objectives, etc. In mathematics teachers use various materials such as CMP3, and non fiction literacy. The science materials used are: FOSS, SEPUP, GLENCOE textbook, Access Science: Building through Learning textbook, Visual Learning Co. Instructional DVDs, free online resources, concept maps, Planting Science, Disney’s Planet Challenge, GLOBE program, and Leave-it-better program. For social studies the content materials consist of: the NYC DOE PAsport to SOcial Studies curriculum, Student Atlas, GLENCOE Spanish history textbooks for 6-8th grades, internet resources such as New York Historical Society (nyhs.org), Gilder Lehrman Society (gilderlehrman.org), Library of Congress (lc.gov), and Digital History (digitalhistory.org). In all content areas (Science, Social Studies and Mathematics), instruction in English will provided on alternate days, with instruction in Spanish on the other days for a 50%/50% dual language model. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Home language evaluation occurs during HLA instruction time through informal assessments such as the baseline Word Generation Academic Vocabulary writing assignments, portfolios and teacher anecdotals. In additional, all students are evaluated three times per year with the Multiple Language Screener (MLS). 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Our SIFE students are integrated into regular dual language classes and receive differentiated instruction along with their classmates. In addition, SIFE students take part in academic intervention classes during extended day programs and in pull-out small group instruction with teachers that have been trained in the use of RIGOR (Reading Instructional Goals for Older Readers) in Spanish and are assigned for this work during their regular instructional periods. b. 96% of our students are newcomers receiving our regular instructional program as described above. Each student is placed into a class based on their level (entering, emergent, transitioning, expanding and commanding). All students are given phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, comprehension, and vocabulary instruction through the use the Word Generation Academic Vocabulary Program, to enhance their English acquisition outside of the ENL class and through small group instruction within the ENL class. In addition, small group pull-out instruction is provided to meet the needs of homogeneous groups within a class using programs such as English Rigor and System 44 components (other than technology). In class, entering level ELLs use computerized reading programs to support their English reading instruction through the use of Raz-Kids and/or News ELA programs. In addition, an allotted amount of time throughout the school year is used to do test preparation prior to the state exams as well as year round instruction in reading strategies. c. 1% of our students are ELLs receiving services for 4-6 years through our regular instructional program as described above. In addition they take part in academic intervention and/or enrichment courses during extended day programs and in small group pull-out sessions with teachers assigned for this work during their regular professional periods. Teachers use The Comprehension Toolkit by Stephanie Harvey & Anne Goudvis to engage students in active literacy discussions during pull-out enrichment groups. d. We currently do not have any long-term ELLs. In the case that we were to enroll a long-term ELL, this student would be included in the SIFE intervention plan. They would also be given small group or one-to-one pull-out intervention services which will include NYSESLAT test preparation and reading strategy instruction at their grade level. e. Former ELLs take part in advanced native language arts books clubs two periods per week in a small group session and receive all ELL testing accomodations. Former ELLs receive transitional 90 minutes per week of ELA. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our ELL-SWDs receive all services mandated in Individual Education Plans (IEPs) including counseling, speech and hearing and SETTs services in Spanish. Built into our regular programming is the use of SIOP that provides multiple strategies for ELL-SWDs in the regular classroom. Classroom teachers also use small group instruction within the classroom to assist ELL-SWDs in their content areas and in learning to use the learning strategies. Teachers must explicitly teach learning strategies to enhance access to content, academic, and life-skills proficiency (Echevarrria & Graves, 2007, p. 101) such as the use of cognates, the writing process, finding the main idea, steps for an experiment, procedures for solving a math problem, etc. As part of our regular programming, direct instruction about the process of second language acquisition is provided to all students to enhance thinking and listening skills and is supported throughout the year. ELL-SWDs are given explicit instruction in these skills during multiple lessons to enhance their understanding of language development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our ELL-SWDs are integrated into regular dual language classes to maximize their time with the general population and they receive differentiated instruction along with their classmates. ELL-SWDs receive IEP services through pull-out and extended day intervention. ELL-SWDs are given explicit instruction and modified assignments (such as reduced amount of work, extra time to complete assignments, adjusted pacing of instruction, direct positive reinforcement, alternative activities, abundant guided practice, etc.). Depending on the student’s individual needs, they are given opportunities to work independently, in cooperative learning groups and/or in small group instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We provide instruction in Reading Instructional Goals for Older Readers (RIGOR) in both Spanish and English to SIFE and newcomer ELL subgroups. All newcomers receive cross-content instruction in the Word Generation Program in both English and Spanish to promote cross-content vocabulary development. News ELA and Raz-Kids are used for small group reading intervention within the ENL/ELA block according to the students’ proficiency levels in literacy and the highest needs subgroup receives extra practice during small-group pull-out. ENL/ELA alternative assessments include portfolios of student writing samples and reflections on learning. In math all students receive remedial intervention in the classroom through the use of TAI (Teacher Assisted Instruction) and ST Math in order to develop their basic operation and computation skills at their own pace. The highest needs subgroup receives extra TAI and Mammoth Math intervention through small-group pull-out instruction to monitor their independent progress and give immediate feedback. Targeted intervention in science and social studies consists of small group or one-to-one instruction to front load key terms and essential vocabulary with the assistance of the Brain POP computer program providing a wide range of animated visual information. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will continue to develop our Word Generation program in all classes in all subject areas. We will establish on-going periodic assessments of student literacy skills in L2 using the Independent Reading Level Assessment (IRLA) and we will establish a reading and writing class period for Commanding students that provides students with language appropriate challenges at grade level. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our school recruits ELL students during registration fairs and middle school fairs in the Washington Heights and Inwood areas to come to our Middle School Dual Language program. Our Parent Association and school staff meet with Harbor Heights parents and students throughout the year to inform them of our assemblies and workshops that provide community services and educational programs that support our ELLs and their transitioning needs. These include the YMHA &YHA of Washington Heights/Inwood Schools Out New York City (SONYC) Program that provides 90% of our students with 3 hours of academic tutorials and enrichment activities five days a week after school; Children’s Arts & Science Workshops providing access to free ENL classes for family members of our students, Alianza Dominicana providing access to housing and nutrition assistance and family counseling. People’s Theater Project is an organization that supports the use of theater to raise awareness of the urgent issues impacting the community and advocates for social justice, and Dancing Classrooms works with our 8th graders and their parents to build social awareness, confidence and self-esteem in children through the practice of social dance. Other curricular and extracurricular programs that all of our students have access to include: Leave-It-Better, a program integrated into the science curriculum about environmental issues, soccer which enables team building and conflict resolution skills development, and a student advisory board which consists of our seelcted students of the month representing all classes and grade levels in developing plans to improve the school. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We have computer-based software to target balanced literacy skills to support all ELL subgroups such as Learning A-Z and Raz-kids, NEWS ELA, Brain Pop and Google Classrooms. These are tailored to our ELLs’ individual needs in literacy skills. Every classroom is equipped with a bilingual library and reference materials. The following technology enhancements are used to support instruction of ELLs by building background knowledge (ie. using smart boards to show images and create graphic organizers); teaching learning strategies (ie. using overhead projectors or document projectors to model note taking skills); interacting with our beginning ELL subgroups (ie. projecting visuals and providing access to interactive websites and applications on laptops and iPads); providing predictable routines and uniform visuals that support all ELL subgroups in content 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  areas (ie. poster maker to create visual resources posted in every classroom such as THINK-PAIR-SHARE), and differentiating assessments (ie. Zip cameras used to record presentations and projects as alternative assessments). The HLA materials used are Seleciones Literarias, RIGOR, SENDAS and Tio Nacho phonics and phonemic awareness curriculum. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? All students receive HLA content classes and all student progress is evaluated three times a year using the MLS. Extended day programs and pull-out groups are conducted bilingually based on students’ proficiency levels. Our goal is for each student to progress at least one to two grade levels in HLA each year and to pass the Second Language Proficiency Exam at the end of 8th grade in order to earn advanced high school credit in foreign languages towards their Regents diplomas. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Serving an entire newcomer population, everything we do ensures services are appropriate and support ELLs of all ages and grade levels, including ELL-SWDs that correspond to student's ages, grade and IEP mandates. We provide the CCLS to all students and provide entry points for our ELLs with supplementary programs such as ELS NEWS, National Geographic materials and digital instruction such as the BRAIN POP Program. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We share a cafeteria and gymnasium with an elementary school and we hold joint assemblies with the other school. We actively recruit their transitioning 5th graders who are new to the country into our 6th grade classes to provide continuity for immigrant families. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Every new student to the school undergoes an orientation session with their parents, provided by our admissions team (Parent Coordinator, Dean of Conduct, Pupil Accounting Secretary and Guidance Counselor) that includes orientation to our school’s mission and philosophy, rules of conduct, Comprehensive Education Plan (CEP) goals, uniform policy, advisory program and extended day program opportunities. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer other language electives at this time 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We use a self-contained dual language model with EPs and ELLs integrated into classes together. 50% of each week is conducted in Spanish and 50% of the week is conducted in English, with alternating days of different instruction in the content areas. Both languages are taught at the same time (a simultaneous model). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our common branch, subject area teachers, assistant principal, guidance counselor, parent coordinator and secretary (we do not have a bilingual/ESL coordinator, paraprofessionals, special ed. teachers, psychologist and occupational therapist) all engage in a wide variety of differentiated professional development actives throughout the school year provided by a combination of BFSC support, NYCDOE Division of English Language Learners and Student Support, professional consultants and in-house teaching staff to include the following: a. ADVANCE teacher development training using the Danielson Framework for teacher effectiveness b. Professional Learning Communities (Common Core State Standards (CCSS) curriculum development with focus on Performance Based Assessment Tasks (PBATS) in Literacy and Mathematics) that meet once a week for 45 minutes throughout the entire school year. c. Professional Learning Communities (Looking at Student Work as a result of PBATS in alignment with the NY State CCSS) that meet once a week for 45 minutes throughout the entire school year. d. Data Specialist training on data collection and analysis for formal and informal data collection once a month for three hours. e. DOE source systems (ATS and STARS) training every other month for 7 hours for secretary. All professional development sessions are recorded with meeting agendas, minutes and attendance logs shard with the entire community (including administration) on the Google Docs platform. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All of our professional development is ELL specific, since we serve over a 90% ELL student population. We provide specific advisory curriculum training during faculty conference meetings for all of our teachers and our bilingual guidance counselor at least every other month for 1-2 hours because the advisory program they instruct guides students in orientation to middle school procedures, expectations and protocols as well as high school expectations, requirements and choices. Teachers are trained in strategies and methodologies for individual student academic and social affective goal setting. All professional development sessions are recorded with meeting agendas, minutes and attendance logs shard with the entire community (including administration) on the Google Docs platform. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 1. Parent Involvement in our school consists of a wide variety of activities including the following. All parent activities are conducted in the parents' native language of Spanish; no translation services are necessary: a. Parent members of the school leadership team participate in school Learning Walks. Parents are interviewed as part of the school’s Quality Review and parent surveys are a vital part of the School’s Progress Report process. b. Parents take part in on-going workshop series on the following topics, that are provided by our own teaching staff: Second Language Learning; Content area support at home and internet usage. c. An evaluation is conducted at two spring PA meetings providing opportunity for parents to give feedback and suggestions on school improvement strategies. The survey is the responsibility of the Parent Coordinator. The Parent Coordinator, along 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  with members of the PA Executive board organizes the parent feedback and presents the findings to the principal for review and consideration. Parents have the opportunity to provide feedback on topics such as: instruction, school-to-home communication, guidance services, academic intervention services and security. d. The school, with the assistance of the district and parents, educates its teachers, pupil services personnel, principals and other staff, in how to reach out to, communicate with and work with parents as equal partners, in the value and utility of contributions of parents, and in ways to implement and coordinate parent programs and build ties between parents and the schools by: providing teachers with professional development regarding the most effective techniques in involving parents through respectful conversations; involving parents in the regular activities of the school and involving parents in the Student of the Month assemblies. Parents support their children’s learning in our school in the following ways: • Monitoring attendance. • Making sure that homework is completed. • Monitoring amount of television their children watch. • Volunteering in their child’s classroom. • Participating, as appropriate, in decisions relating to their children’s education. • Promoting positive use of their child’s extracurricular time. • Staying informed about child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school or the school district either received by child or by mail and responding, as appropriate. • Serving, to the extent possible, on policy advisory groups, such as being the Title I, Part A parent representative on the school’s School Improvement Team, the Title I Policy Advisory Committee, the District wide Policy Advisory Council, the State’s Committee of Practitioners, the School Leadership Team or other school advisory or policy groups. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. a. Parent members of the school leadership team participate in school Learning Walks. Parents are interviewed as part of the school’s Quality Review and parent surveys are a vital part of the School’s Progress Report process. b. Parents take part in on-going workshop series on the following topics, that are provided by our own teaching staff: Second Language Learning; Content area support at home and internet usage. c. An evaluation is conducted at two spring PA meetings providing opportunity for parents to give feedback and suggestions on school improvement strategies. The survey is the responsibility of the Parent Coordinator. The Parent Coordinator, along with members of the PA Executive board organizes the parent feedback and presents the findings to the principal for review and consideration. Parents have the opportunity to provide feedback on topics such as: instruction, school-to-home communication, guidance services, academic intervention services and security. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Monica Klehr, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Harbor Heights Middle School School DBN: 06M349 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Monica Klehr Title Principal Edgar Reyes Assistant Principal Jacqueline Brito Parent Coordinator Roberto Gomar ENL/Bilingual Teacher Laura Canela Parent Arturo de la Cruz Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/15/17 06/15/17 06/15/17 06/15/17 06/15/17 06/15/17 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 06M349 School Name: Harbor Heights Middle School Superintendent: Manuel Ramirez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jacqueline Brito Parent Coordinator no Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our admissions process is conducted by a designated team consisting of: Bilingual (Spanish/English)Parent Coordinator (Jacqueline Brito) Bilingual (Spanish/English) Pupil Accounting Secretary (Aydee Cabrera), Bilingual (Spanish/English) Assessment Coordinator (Francisco Perez Martinez) and the Bilingual (Spanish/English) Assistant Principal (Edgar Reyes)and Bilingual (Spanish/English) Principal (Monica Klehr). When new students arrive at our school, our Bilingual (Spanish/English)Parent Coordinator (Jacqueline Brito) and Bilingual (Spanish/English) Pupil Accounting Secretary (Aydee Cabrera), first conduct an informal interview and administer the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS). When the HLIS indicates Spanish as the main language spoken by the student with the family in the home we prepare all communications in the native language of the home. We also review the ATS report of preferred language and blue card data. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish and English N/A N/A N/A 327 N/A N/A N/A 100 N/A N/A N/A 327 N/A N/A N/A 100 N/A N/A N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Monthly at the beginning of each month from June 2017-June 2018 Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. On-site native Spanish speakers on school staff are assigned by principal to translate documents. Student recruitment and orientation fliers, registration documents such as lunch forms, blue cards, immunization references, electronics policy, student and family handbook, after school program flier and application, monthly announcement calendars, safety procedures, parent-teacher conference announcements, New York State testing dates, all letters from school leadership, special event announcements, special student activity permission forms, high school application procedures and forms, graduation programs, etc. All of our communications with parents are provided in Spanish and English at all times throughout the year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Four parent teacher conferences: Sept. 15,Oct. 27, March 17, May 18 Sept. 15,Oct. 27, March 17, May 18 Every Tuesday during parent engagement time with teacher staff from 3:00-4:15; Every Tuesday while school is in session the entire school year High school application process meetings once a month First Tuesday of the month while school is in session the entire school year regular guidance counselor and dean of conduct calls to parents for at risk students. on-going every school day of the year interpretation service(s)? Fully bilingual administration, teaching and support staff provide interpretation services at all times when parents are in the school or communicated with at home. Fully bilingual administration, teaching and support staff provide interpretation services at all times when parents are in the school or communicated with at home. Fully bilingual administration, teaching and support staff provide interpretation services at all times when parents are in the school or communicated with at home. Fully bilingual administration, teaching and support staff provide interpretation services at all times when parents are in the school or communicated with at home. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We provide Spanish language robo-calls to all students' homes. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  During hiring process and beginning of the year orientation meetings, all current and new staff are informed by principal of school demographics and special translation needs and requirements per CR-A-663. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our parents are informed immediately during initial registration of their children into our school, that the language of communication between our school and parents will be in the parents' native language of Spanish Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We review and take action on results from our annual environmental survey as well as during our regular School Leadership Team meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66 
