 01M363 School Name: NEIGHBORHOOD SCHOOL Principal: DYANTHE SPIELBERG   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Neighborhood School 01M363 310100010363 Pre-K, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 121 East 3 rd Street, NY, NY 10009 212-387-0195 School Number (DBN): 917-534-2545 Fax: School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: Dyanthe Spielberg DSpielberg@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 01 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Dyanthe Spielberg Teddy Fernandez Jenny Ulloa/Rene Zweig Matt Gold N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Carry Chan Superintendent: 166 Essex Street cchan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-353-2948 Phone Number: 212-353-2945 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7th Avenue YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (646) 470-0721 Phone Number: (917) 339-1765 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dyanthe Spielberg Teddy Fernandez Elinor Tatum Emily Hartzell Chelsea Crawford Lindsey Vanno *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Akeela Azury Peter Liem Shannon Galligan-Stierle Matt Gold Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our practice is based on what we understand about children: ● All children are curious about the world and want to learn!   ● Children learn by having experiences with each other, with materials and the environment. ● When school is integrated with the rest of the child’s life, it makes sense and becomes meaningful. ● Children are capable of contributing to the group, learning cooperatively and being peaceful productive members of the both a democratic classroom and the larger school community. ● Children engage in learning and demonstrate what they learn in many ways. With the deep belief in the remarkable capabilities of each child we build on their strengths whether they are academic, artistic, physical or social. We provide a safe and motivating environment for children to try new experiences to build on their strengths and to go further in the areas where they need improvement. We provide a place where their natural capacity for discovery is stimulated and their innate and natural curiosities are focused into a context for learning about themselves and their world. We encourage them to make connections, explore their interests, make good choices and be self-confident about their abilities through the curriculum. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 1. The Neighborhood School is a Community School District 1 (CSD 1) School of Choice. In September 1991, the Neighborhood School was founded to meet the need for a progressive elementary school in our community. Our school has 13 classes spanning pre-kindergarten to 5th grade. Our classes are grouped in multi-age configurations to allow each child to develop both academic and leadership skills. This also allows the children and teachers to know each other and work together over a longer period of time. We have physical education, science/technology and Spanish instruction for all children. Arts collaborations includes Studio in a School, the Partners@3rd program of the Third Street Music School and Dance for Life program of Arts Connection. Children are provided the opportunity to integrate a wide range of skills and subject matter though a core curriculum. In this way, children study the history, natural and physical environment, geography, culture and people of a particular location and are given time to learn and think critically about themselves and others. Our entire curriculum has a strong emphasis on developing research skills, critical thinking, problem solving, communication and socialization. As children grow and move on to the upper grades, they go from studying their immediate environments to studying the larger city and its history as well as other geographic areas and their histories. We look at each child and measure her/his growth and development on an individual continuum. Regular curriculum letters, Principal’s letters, individualized progress reports, portfolios and family conferences provide avenues of communication between school and families. Teachers use assessments such as anecdotal notes, running records and writing and math samples to analyze individual students’ progress and make decisions about class instruction. As facilitators, we help children come up with solutions and solve problems. Conflict resolution provides techniques for teaching children how to be peaceful members of a multicultural, non-sexist learning community. School-wide policies and practices are formed collaboratively and dynamically to provide a cohesive, unified, thoughtful environment for children. We are self-reflective and re-evaluate our policies periodically in an effort to meet the needs of our children and ever evolving community. As part of a DOE the first District-wide Pre-Kindergarten and Kindergarten admissions pilot this past year, The Office of Enrollment gave priority to kindergarten and pre-kindergarten applicants of TNS who qualify for free and reduced lunch (FRL) and/or live in temporary housing and/or are English Language Learners (ELLs). We hope that the admissions pilot enables TNS to maintain and increase diversity in two demographic areas in which we differ greatly 0  from most schools in District 1. It is not a band-aid, nor is it end-goal by any means. Moreover, it in no way encompasses the many varied and complex ways we think about diversity at our school and in our community. This pilot supports the mission of our school to “provide a lively and diverse educational community. We see our diversity as one of our great strengths. In our mixed age, heterogeneous classrooms, children of many different backgrounds learn to become part of a community that fosters not only tolerance but also true respect for all people.” 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 25% of our student body is comprised of students with special needs. Over the past three years, we have worked very hard to place all of our students with IEPs in the least restrictive environments. These students need additional support for their academic and social/emotional needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Strong systems of improvement have resulted in increased and higher quality student work product. Curricular tasks afford students access to meaningful content and opportunities to express understanding in varied ways making student thinking and learning visible across classrooms. While there is a strong observation process that promotes teacher self-reflection and peer collaboration, there are a few teachers who need more support implementing new strategies through teacher team work and the observation-feedback model. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 01M363 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 304 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 3 3 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 6 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 44.0% % Attendance Rate 38.8% % Reduced Lunch 3.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 34.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 46.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.08 4% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 46.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 94% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A NO N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A NO N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 72 71 93.3% 4.9% 21.1% 9.2% 6.3% 3.6% 0 17% 4.7 48.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Neighborhood School is strong when it comes to ensuring that all students especially those with challenges are able access all the material. However, in the Quality Review, the reviewer suggested that students who were academically quicker may have been slow to take initiative to further extend and deepen their learning, after assigned tasks were finished. We need to find ways to increase opportunities for students who are quick to “get it.” Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teachers on grade teams will plan collaboratively using the Understanding by Design framework to create social studies units that have agreed upon big ideas, essential questions, skills and knowledge but that may differ in how activities emerge in each class. Each unit will also include a "social justice" lens appropriate to the content and the grade level and will have several opportunities for extension work.. By February 2019, the principal and grade teams will compare narrative data from September with narrative data through November to gauge the increase of students’ ability to initiate extension work in their classrooms as evidence for deeper student engagement. By June, 2018 grade teams will have documented 2 units of study for social studies for the year. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will select Option PROSE and/or participate in focused inter-visitations with other teachers in the school. For each observation, teachers will meet prior to the lesson and debrief afterwards. Three periods a week will be set aside for teachers to visit other classrooms and debrief with their colleagues. Teachers will analyze and revise lesson and unit plans based on student work, documentation and informal assessments, including those of students with disabilities and ELLS, during weekly grade level meetings, after school PD time and PD half-days. Teachers will set-aside PD time to develop plans and implement strategies to extend learning for students. All grade levels will have a common prep time during the instructional school day and ICT partnerships will have an additional prep period a week to revise lesson plans based on student work. Teachers Principal, teachers October, 2018 – June 2019 Teachers, paraprofessionals September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, PD Committee, teachers Students reading above grade level will participate in weekly book clubs with the Librarian. Librarian, students The PD Committee will plan PD for teachers and paraprofessionals, to take place every week. Our 6 PD half-days will be designated to description inquiry processes. teachers, paraprofessionals Librarian Principal, PD Committee October 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The School Leadership Team will identify curriculum based topics around which in-depth talks or panels will be created so that TNS families and teachers can have an ongoing dialogue about TNS academics. This will include curriculum shares, portfolio conferences, and Dyanthe's Morning Hour. This will foster a better understanding of what 4  learning looks like in the classroom and will give families an opportunity to support this learning at home. This work will be on-going, beginning in September. Key Personnel: SLT, Principal, Parent Coordinator, teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Meeting time for math lesson study planning and reflection Student Portfolios Coverage for teachers to attend lesson studies, participate in intervisitations, and PROSE Observations Coverage for classroom teachers to participate in weekly grade level meetings Meeting time for PD Committee Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By October, grade levels will have documented 1 social studies unit of study, with extensions for students who need additional challenge. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Units of Study Lesson Plans Student work Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Over the last three years, our teachers, support staff, the principal and paraprofessionals strengthened our analysis of how racism manifests in our school and classrooms, enhanced our understanding of how racism affects children, utilized tools to address race and racism with students, and gained strategies to support a school-wide culture of respect, equity and inclusivity. As we enter year 4 of the diversity pilot, we continue to work to ensure that all our families and children feel valued members of the community. We will also continue to partner with Emotional Responsive Practice at Bank Street to support the social and emotional needs of our students. We will also develop structures across all grades for students and teachers to reflect on work products and set goals for mastery, extension and next steps for core subjects. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By December of 2018 we will have two ongoing parent affinity groups across shared interests or commonalities (i.e., race, special needs, etc.) By June 2019, students and teachers will regularly use reflective practices to reflect on work products and set goals for mastery, extension and next steps for core subjects. By November 2018 we will conduct workshops on how to best support our children (especially in later grades) with regard to navigating the social media world and digital citizenship. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Diversity Committee will host two anti-racism workshops for families: This training provides parents, guardians and caregivers with strategies for how to talk about race and racism with their children. Parents learn how children see race, gain skills for approaching age-appropriate conversations with a racial equity lens, and practice strategies to promote positive racial identity development in children. Diversity Committee members will also be trained to facilitate affinity groups for parents and caregivers. Create and facilitate separate student and staff affinity groups to talk about common interests and needs and continue work around the diversity initiative Health and Wellness Committee will partner with Families Thriving to provide Gender and Body Awareness workshops and Triple P Positive Parenting Solutions. Emotionally Responsive Practice with Bank Street: the school will continue their work with School Sponsored Initiative and participate in para and teacher PD, Administrative Seminar Groups, Teacher Support Group, and classroom observations and post observation seminars. In groups, a teacher who attended the ERP workshops at Bank Street will turn key the information to the other teachers in the school during a PD Families, Staff October 2018 - May 2019 Principal, Diversity Committee, Border Crossers, Families Thriving, The Health and Wellness Committee Teachers, paraprofessionals, Principal, support staff September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Bank Street ERP, PD Committee Students and teachers will regularly reflect on final work products for their student portfolios. Students, teachers We will implement a Digital Citizenship Curriculum for all 3rd, 4th and 5th grade students. We [will] guide students in their use of educational programs like the Google Suite safely. Our digital citizenship curriculum addresses the following topics: Students and Families Respecting privacy of yourself and others (not sharing passwords, signing out of your accounts); Netiquette and the October 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, teachers, PD Committee Teachers, Librarian, Principal 7 Power of Words (Respectful, useful interactions) Respecting Others’ Work (copyright, citations) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The School Leadership Team will identify topics (curriculum and social emotional response practices) around which in-depth talks or panels will be created so that TNS families and teachers can have an ongoing dialogue about TNS academics. This will include curriculum shares, portfolio conferences, and Dyanthe's Morning Hour. This will foster a better understanding of what learning looks like in the classroom and will give families an opportunity to support this learning at home. This work will be on-going, beginning in September. Key Personnel: SLT, Principal, Parent Coordinator, teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Materials for Maker Space Per Session for Librarian and teachers to plan Maker Space Portfolios Time for students and teacher to reflect on work for student porfolios Emotionally Responsive Classroom with Bank Street PD Time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, there will be at least one Staff led PD to turn key ideas and best practices from their work with Bank Street on Emotionally Responsive Practices. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PD Planning Calendar Events Planning Calendar Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At TNS, schoolwide policies and practices are formed collaboratively and dynamically to provide a cohesive, unified, thoughtful environment for children. We are self-reflective and re-evaluate our policies periodically in an effort to meet the needs of our children and ever evolving community. Our staff has been coming together for professional development after school each week since we began. We approach PD as inquiry: it is emergent and therefore not linear. Our PD committee, made up of the principal and teachers meet regularly to reflect on the work and plan next steps. The process is constantly evolving in response to students’ changing needs and interests, parental and community interests and concerns, and teachers' priorities. We also devote 6 half-days to descriptive reviews of practice and children. The descriptive review process is a specific protocol for analyzing [concerns], using a structure of judgment-free problem solving. This process of looking and thinking helps teachers and paras understand a particular student as a learner. The review process, developed at the Prospect Center, also enables teachers to deepen their understanding of teaching and of schools, and it leads to recommendations for action. The process not only broadens how we see one child, but profoundly changes the culture by which teachers think about seeing children and their work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Staff will continue to engage in structured professional collaborations on teams, across grade levels and disciplines, using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning. We will collaboratively develop and implement a school-wide homework policy to ensure uniformity across all grades and continuity from grade to grade. We aim to support a sustainable home-school connection through this initiative. By September 12, 2018 all parents will be notified of our new school-wide homework policy. On Family Night, September 17, 2018, the school will set aside time for a question and answer session for parents regarding this new policy. Parents will have the opportunity to share thoughts and feedback regarding our new homework policy and how it has strengthened the home-school connection at our PTA and SLT meetings. Starting in October 2018, staff will share noticings of the new homework policy at one of the Monday PDs each month. 0  In June 2019, staff will review noticings of the implementation of the new homework and determine any modifications or additions for the following school year. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The PD Committee will plan PD for teachers and paraprofessionals, to take place every week. Our 6 PD half-days will be designated to description inquiry processes. Teachers, paraprofessionals September 2018– June 2019 Principal, Consultant, PD Committee Staff will participate in a weekend retreat during the spring to reflect on our work together and think more deeply about an aspect of our teaching practice. Staff will work in small collaborative inquiry groups with an emphasis on student portfolios and inquiry studies. Teachers will select Option PROSE and/or participate in inter-visitations with other teachers in the school to better understand student achievement and data-informed teaching. For each observation, teachers will meet prior to the lesson and debrief afterwards. Teachers, principal, out of classroom support staff Teachers Teachers Spring 2019 Retreat Committee Teachers, Principal, paraprofessionals Teachers, Principal September 2018– June 2019 September 2018– June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Dyanthe's Morning Hour- October 2018- May 2019 Dyanthe's Weekly Letters- September 2018 - June 2019 Library collection reflective of our school community, programming, open access to families to promote literacy. A newly established, school-wide homework policy will ensure clarity and uniformity across all grades and continuity from grade to grade. This will promote teacher-parent/family collaborations and will support of their children at home. Teachers Principal 2  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Meeting time for PD Committee Coverage for teachers to participate in inter-visitations, Option PROSE and attend SST 6 PD half-days Coverage for classroom teachers to participate in weekly grade level meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, planning in the vast majority of classrooms will reflect high-level engagement and curriculum aligned to the Next Generation standards. By September 2018, all classrooms are implementing the new schoolwide homework initiative. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Records of PD, agenda, notes from PD committee teacher reflections will guide our work. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the Principal’s PPO this year, evaluators saw that while there is a strong observation process that promotes teacher self-reflection and peer collaboration, there are some teachers who need more support implementing new strategies through teacher team work and the observation-feedback model. By October 2018, the principal and the PD Committee will engage the entire teaching staff in an inquiry project to determine several common best practices that are evident across a majority of classrooms and assess the level of implementation of each. By November 2018, the principal and the PD committee will implement school wide PD for effective implementation of these several best practices. By January 2019, a support plan will be initiated for any teacher who needs further assistance/coaching to implement these practices. Supports will include, but are not limited to, teacher intervisitation, focused in-house PD, and non-evaluative observations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The Principal and the PD Committee will develop professional learning plans that will provide a whole school approach to utilizing teacher mentors, teacher teams and a coach to align best practices. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The coach will conduct 6 week cycles of observations and debriefs with teachers and teacher teams in need of additional instructional and planning support. New and developing Teachers September 2018– June 2019 Principal, Jane Andrias, PD Committee The Principal will meet with every classroom and cluster teacher one time a month to debrief classroom visits, reflect on pedagogy and discuss individual classrooms issues. Teachers will select Option PROSE and/or participate in focused inter-visitations with other teachers in the school. For each observation, teachers will meet prior to the lesson and debrief afterwards. 6 periods a week will be set aside for teachers to visit other classrooms and debrief with their colleagues. Teachers and paraprofessionals will participate in Manhattan Field Support Center and District 1 PDs including, ICT Sessions for ICT teams, Math lesson studies, PD about race and racism, Wilson and Fundations Reading PDs and social studies PDs. Teachers Teachers Principal, teachers Principal, teachers October 2018– June 2019 October 2018– June 2019 Teachers, Paraprofessional October 2018– June 2019 Principal, PD Committee, Manhattan Field Support Center, District 1, Bank Street, Math Collective, Border Crossers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Dyanthe’s Morning Hour-Principal, monthly meetings Curriculum Night-teachers, principal, twice a year Family Liaisons - elected PTA positions- every week 5  Dyanthe’s Weekly Letters- Principal- weekly Curriculum Letters- teachers-2 times a month Class parent communication-weekly Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Manhattan Field Support Center Per Session/Per Diem for inter-visitations and Option PROSE Jane Andrias as funded by the PTA Bank Street Emotionally Responsive Practice Math Collective Intervisitation periods and prep periods Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January, 3 inter-visitation cycles will have taken place. By February, all teachers will be observed by the principal at least 2 times. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Principal observation Notes Teacher observation notes Jane Andrias notes APPR Evaluation Forms Teachers' mid-year and end-of-year conference notes PD Calendar and Plans Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. TNS brings a wide array of community-based groups into the school to work with children, including arts, music, and dance organizations; groups focused on social justice issues; and groups who work on environmental causes. TNS students also move out into the community to visit museums, theatre performances, community organizations such as firehouses and retirement homes. TNS hosts events --the artisan fair, holiday fair, book fair, community garden day--that offer opportunities for community members to visit and engage with TNS. Improve communication about TNS-community ties by a) creating a page on the website that highlights community ties; b) increasing participation in TNS activities by improving communications; c) ensure that families new to TNS, especially at the Pre-K level, feel welcomed and have a chance to share their questions and concerns. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Review, improve, and streamline communications processes and protocols to improve community participation in TNS activities and support children both at home and at school. Ensure that parents who speak languages other than English are being reached by TNS communications. Inventory and publicize the connections that classroom teachers are making within the larger NYC community to create an accessible list of resources for classrooms and families. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Establish communications task force to review communications practices at TNS and recommend strategies for streamlining existing practices. As part of this work, the task force should ensure that TNS and PTA communications are reaching parents who speak languages other than English. Families September 2018 – May 2019 New families July 2018 – May 2019 Continue our buddy system program, whereby families new to The Neighborhood School community are assigned to an established family within the community who can serve as a guide and answer any/all questions and concerns as the new family transitions. There will be a new families event welcoming and introducing buddy families at the start of the year and opportunities for buddies to come together throughout the year. Given the new class structure at TNS to be implemented in the fall, TNS will review how new families, especially in the Pre-K and K-1 classrooms, are welcomed into the school, and will create opportunities for parents to discuss their questions and concerns. Communications task force including SLT members, Parent Engagement Liaisons, Website Coordinators, PTA members, TNS staff Principal, Outreach Committee, Teachers Host workshops and support groups for families including anti-racism Border Crossers workshops, support groups such as Parents of Unique Kids and workshops such as, Managing Your Child’s Big Feelings, Triple P Positive Parenting Solution. Families October 2018 – June2019 Principal, PTA, parent coordinator, teachers, Border Crossers and Families Thriving. Families September 2018 – June2019 Principal, PTA Continue the Parent Engagement Liaison position in the PTA, who is responsible for organizing class parents, streamlining communications, offering support and idea to class parents in order to improve teacher/family communications. Assign Class Parent Liaisons, who will serve as liaisons between teachers and parents. The class parent will be responsible for communicating both individual class as well as school-wide events on a timely basis, and for organizing optional events to develop community among classroom parents. (S)he will also be aware of preferred form of communication with each parent (email, backpack mail, etc.), In addition to individual class parents, there will also be a Class Parent Committee to help educate those newer to the role 8 on their responsibilities and serve as a resource for the Class Parents throughout the year- potentially offering workshops every several months. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Help families establish home environments that support children as learners by hosting morning hours on topics ranging from understanding of progressive education to deeper expertise with what authentic assessment looks like to thoughts on homework so that families are able to carry information from school to home. Enable parents to understand what growth looks like for an individual child as they move from one phase of development to another by hosting family workshops. Continue to support groups such as Parents of Unique Kids and workshops such as, Managing Your Child’s Big Feelings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Meeting time for Diversity Committee Border Crossers Meeting time for Out Reach Committee and Communications Committee Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, we will have held a Border Crossers workshop for families and one series of Triple P Positive Parenting Solution workshops. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TNS Calendar Attendance Sheets for events DOE Parent Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher observations and student work determine that student is not mastering concepts; students referred through Student Study Team, teacher Teacher observations and student work determine that student is not mastering concepts; students referred through Student Study Team, teacher Teacher observations and student work determine that student is not mastering concepts Teacher observations and student work determine that student is not mastering concepts Students referred through Student Study Team Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group and one-to-one During the school day Guided reading, Wilson instruction, Fundationsinstruction, word study and word sorts, conferring Guided practice, conferring Small group, partner and one-to-one During the school day Partners and small groups During the school day Small group and one-to-one During the school day Small group and one-to-one During the school day Hands-on experiments, conferring Pre-teaching, post-teaching, strategy groups Individual counseling through Hudson Guild, Family counseling through Families Thriving, counseling groups, Sounds and Motions 0  1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 5 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 4  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal 5  Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 6   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Neighborhood School in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Neighborhood School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 8  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 9  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Neighborhood School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 0  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 1  ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 2  ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 01 School Name The Neighborhood School Borough Manhattan School Number 363 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dyanthe Speilberg Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sylvia Vidal Teacher/Subject Area Alexis Neider/Gen Ed Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Jane Taylor/Gen Ed Teacher Related-Service Provider Amanda Zarriello/Speech Teache Superintendent Daniella Phillips Assistant Principal NA Coach School Counselor Tina Cella Parent Parent Coordinator Noemi Mora Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 4  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 284 Total number of ELLs 10 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.52% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 0 4 1 3 4 2 0 K 5 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 1 5 0 4 5 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 10 0 0 0 0 0 10 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? After reviewing the data patterns across grade levels and proficiency levels, it is clear that our ELLs are stronger in their oral (listening/speaking) skills than their literacy (reading/writing) skills. The use of Fountas and Pinnell provides a means to assign appropriately graded readers for the students, which are then scaffolded using ESL methodology. TCRWP or Teachers College Reading and Writing assessments are also utilized. We also use running records to examine previous history and make comparisons of how much progress has been made over any given period of time. This provides us information about students' phonemic awareness, lexical ability, reading comprehension and fluency. This data helps inform our school's instructional plan and form appropriate guided reading groups. Additionally, the TCRWP provides a benchmark of the students' vocabulary and spelling development, which serves as a guide to differentiate students' learning activities. 5  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Data is examined collectively at least three times a year and on a student's needs basis. In addition, data collected by the ENL teacher is shared with the classroom teachers periodically and on a needs basis. The collective assessment data provides information of student's strength and weakness. It allows teachers to plan effectively to address the individual needs of English language learners. ENL teacher with classroom teacher work collaboratively to create informal assessments that may provide a deeper view of student's strengths and weakness. These may and are not limited to spelling inventory, student portfolios, self assessments, journal writing progressions, writing in different genres and classroom projects. Consequently, targeted instruction reflects the areas of most need but also encourages the growth of student's individual strengths. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ultimate test of the success of the ELL program is the degree of success that students experience in their regular English classrooms. Even though they may demonstrate steady progress on the NYSESLAT, the final test takes place among their English-speaking peers, on the ELA, and eventually in the English-speaking communities. Our goal is to have our students achieve full integration and facility in the use of English approximating native-like proficiency—even as the ELLs retain and deepen their knowledge of and appreciation for their own native language. We examine student data histories compiled by both the ENL teacher and classroom teachers, based on project-based assessments, classroom observation anecdotal records standardized test data as well as portfolio assessment. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data has been gathered and are maintained in a student binder, these are revisited to review each student's progress. Students that are not demonstrating growth and progress and/or are demonstrating a target area of weakness, SLT team meets to review such data and decisions are then made to address potential interventions. The review process uses data from all areas, such as scores or assessments for Math, ELA and other specific areas to examine and target student's individual needs for intervention. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Most of our ELL's are in the lower grades and therefore early intervention is considered once SLT has reviewed data. Among the early intervention our school provides includes Tier I focusing on improving core instruction, Tier II focusing on more intensive interventions within homogenous groups. Only after a comprehensive, multidiscilinary evaluation has taken place is special edcuation considered. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The ELL population at the Neighborhood School usually scores higher on their oral NYSESLAT exams than on their reading or writing exams. Further analysis shows that writing is a weak area, and ELLs have a need for additional scaffolding in this area. While ELLs progressively achieve the commanding levels on the NYSESLAT, trends in writing and reading comprehension tend to continue to be areas of need due to vocabulary and language limitation. Therefore, ELLs need extra instruction in phonics, syntax and academic vocabulary study. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Adjustments are made to our ENL program based on meetings, conferences and review of individual needs. These are structured by ENL team work that include review of the LAP but especially focused on "how students are understanding language" what they need and what teachers would need to re-adjust to meet these needs. These adjustments may be as simple as adding more scaffolding, assigning home practices, involving parents, and/or the use of other resources.; learning websites, etc. These structures and or adjustments are usually made continuously throughout the school year, on the basis of individual needs. 6  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Due to the small percentage of our student body that are ELLs, we offer Free Standing ENL, as we do not have the number of students needed to fill a transitional or dual language program, and as ENL is the selection our ELL parents have made. Our Free Standing ENL program will be serving our ELLs in a pull-out service. Most of our ELLs are close in classrooms therefore will travel as a group to the ENL classroom. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ELL students in entering and emerging stage receive 360 minutes of English as a new language weekly. ELL students in transitioning and expanding levels of proficiency receive 180 minutes of instructional mandated time weekly. Students who have received a score of commanding continue to receive services for 90 minutes a week for a remaining of two additional years. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ESL teacher supports classroom lessons by using scaffolding such as modeling, bridging connections between new concepts and prior knowledge, contextualizing by using realia or graphic representations, and schema building by previewing texts or using organizers to prepare for reading a text. Differentiation includes use of graphic organizers, leveled texts, teacher-made templates for writing units, personal word walls for students, and vocabulary development in order to make content comprehensible to all ELLs. The ESL teacher provides support to classroom teachers by making themselves available during common preps and copies of the pacing calendar with teaching points is provided to the ENL teacher for planning. During these pull-out or push in jperiods, all ELL students are learning thematically-based units in the ENL program. Thematic units are aligned with the NYC scope and sequence and Common Core Learning standards. Content areas are embedded in the thematic units and taught simultaneously through the curriculum. Grade appropriate content is taught using these thematic units. Instruction in the ESL program is taught in English through the use of scaffolding strategies. Ths includes use of scaffolding strategies that include modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, and text re-presentation. Also, collaborative learning activities are used, hands-on activities are planned, technology is infused into the curriculum and various materials are utilized, such as authentic texts, books on tape (The New Heights Program published by Pacific Learning), books in the students' native language, and the internet for support. In addition, native language support is provided for ELLs with the access to our school library. ENL teacher makes strong use of cultural books that are also available to students and their famlies in many of the native languages that our ELL's speak. The ENL classroom is a student-centered classroom where the ELL community is developed and students are provided with a risk-free environment. ESL methodologies are used by the ESL teacher to make content comprehensible to all students and meet their needs. ELL approaches include, but are not limited to, the Language Experience Approach, where students share an experience and then produce language in response to their first-hand, multi-sensory experience, and the Whole Language Approach, where students develop their language skills in 7  all four modalities; listening, speaking, reading and writing. ENL instruction incorporates the components of Balanced Literacy, such as read-alouds, shared readings, interactive writings, guided reading and independent reading and writing. Differentiation of process, product or content is done through the use of small group instruction, use of graphic organizers and supplemental materials. ELLs are given opportunities to develop their language skills in all four modalities through their reading experiences, writing activities, listening activities and opportunity to speak on a daily basis by sharing their work, having discussions with their peers, making presentations and actively participating in class. Assessments are also an important part of the ESL curriculum. Both informal and formal assessments are utilized. These assessments will drive instruction as teachers plan using the information gathered to meet the needs of the students. This year, our school has an inquiry team focusing on the development of writing and further developing academic language in our students. Core content is delivered and scaffold in small groups. ENL teacher and classroom teachers often meet to discuss content learning themes, skills and expectations that ENL are currently learning and participating in their classrooms. ENL teacher then scaffolds and creates themes and lessons that align to the learning goals and related instructions of the classrooms. Differentiation is considered for instructional planning. ENL teacher and classroom teacher plan together to scaffold and provide various ways for students to participate in their regular classrooms. Students are provided with additional support materials, such as pictures, access to computers and library. Students are given an opportunity to demonstrate their learning using various assessment tools; presentations, verbal responses, and/or by collaborating with other students. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL's are not evaluated in their home languages throughout the year due to the lack of resources for languages such as Arabic, and Chinese. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Our progressive, workshop approach provides instruction with multiple entry points and differentiation. In addition, for a SIFE student we would offer opportunities for them to work part time in other classes that are closer to their actual level. The SIFE student would also be mentored by a qualified instructor in addition to the classroom teacher. A SIFE point person would be identified who would know best practices for SIFE education and provide PD opportunities for that person. Currently, no SIFE students are enrolled at the Neighborhood School. b. The plan for newcomers is to provide pull-out and push-in service to meet their specific needs, and to provide professional development for the classroom teachers to be able to incorporate ESL methodology into their regular teaching practice. Because newcomers now receive ELA testing after one year, emphasis is placed on BICS and CALPS instruction simultaneously. There is no lag between oral and literacy acquisition in the approach used at the Neighborhood School. As soon as the child knows as few as 10 English words, that child not only learns to recognize and speak them, but read and write them as well. Differentiation is accomplished in pacing instruction and scaffolding the content areas to accommodate each student's prior knowledge and interests. From an adult perspective, the learning pace is accelerated for ELLs who are not in special education, precisely because young children normally have the capacity for rapid language acquisition. c. The Neighborhood School has students in all levels of proficiency, particularly those that are trasitioning and expanding. Those those that are in the developing stages are continuously encouraged to build on their langauge and begin self assessing their learning. In general, ELLs who are receiving 4-6 years of ESL services at the Elementary level are the students who plateau at the same proficiency level for two or more years. When the school has several such students, an ELL inquiry team will be established to focus on academic language development in writing or reading--the two areas that usually constitute the biggest challenges. The goal will be to develop academic language through exposure to various genres in reading and writing, multiple opportunities to practice and assess student progress throughout the year. d. The Neighborhood School had no long-term ELLs either last year, or this current academic year. However, whenever such ELLs arise within an Elementary context, it almost always is in the case of students with IEPs. Such students would receive instruction and support as per their IEPs. Currently, one-third of our ELLs have IEPs. We evaluate each case individually to determine if the child will benefit from additional ESL above the services they receive as per their IEP, or if the IEP mandates do meet the child's instructional needs in all areas, including English language acquisition. ELLs with special 8  needs are supported by having the ESL provider push into the self-contained class in order to support the ELLs therein, model and share strategies with the teacher, paraprofessionals and related service providers. The related service providers and special educators collaborate weekly; the ESL teacher is to be a part of that collaboration to share both best practices and curriculum. e. Monitoring of former ELLs that have scored on a commanding level are closely monitored and assessed mostly by the classroom teacher. Classroom teacher meets with ENL teacher to create approaches that build on student's strengths and continue to foster the areas of weakness, such as vocabulary practices. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies teachers use to provide access to content areas to ELL-SWD include pairing students for reading support, templates/prompts for writing activities, visuals, bilingual glossaries in content area subjects, and the opportunity to use math and science texts in some native languages. The ESL teacher, reading specialists, SETTS and classroom teachers collaborate to make goals for students based on their IEPs. The academic intervention team tracks students and their progress based on running records, progress reports, and reading levels. The ESL teacher provides additional support during content area instruction in the classroom. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ENL teacher and special education teacher along with other members (speech, occupational therapist, etc) meet often to discuss learning behaviors that are common or different among the different settings. Just the same, specialist meet to discuss scheduling that is flexible to all providers and does not promote a restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The school offers various intervention programs for ELLs. In ELA, our school offers a Tier II intervention program to ELLs in the upper grades during Extended Time. The ESL teacher works with a small group of students to provide targeted intervention in literacy. Student work is periodically assessed and used to plan future instruction. The focus is on writing opinion pieces. Instruction focuses on academic language that can be used to express ones opinion in an educated manner. There will be an emphasis on the reading of information texts that will include argumentative and/or opinion pieces, which can be used as mentor texts. Standard-based rubrics are used to assess students' final pieces. Many of our ELLs also receive one-on-one support with students teachers or tutors that are assigned to the classes. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? At the present time we are not considering new programs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. English language learners have equal acces to all programs. Parents are notified of all events and programs. They are periodically advised of changes and or needs for improvements and advised of interventions that will foster their development. Teachers also work collaborately discussing the needs of students and matching them to intervention programs that will target those needs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. When possible, the Neighborhood School makes use of SMART boards, interactive and visually interesting language videos, tutorials, software and games. We offer bilingual glossaries for content areas, as well as native language rich texts. There is a library of books on tape to which the ELLs have access. ELLs are also provided with leveled libraries so that students can read 9  appropriate texts for their ability. All classrooms have computers, which are made accessible to the ELLs for further support. We also use a wide variety of graphic organizers and vocabulary lists for ELLs to support them in content-based instruction. White BoardLaptopsClassroom Computers Listening Centers 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? DL - Not ApplicableTBE - Not Applicabe ENL - Students are encouraged to read in their native language at home. School has a limited number of bilingual text that students often take home or use for independent reading time in the classroom. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Services, resources and support that correspond to ELL's ages and grade levels are adequately distributed and aligned to age levels as well as proficiency levels based on prior experience and collection of resources ENL teacher has gathered throughout the years. In addition, ENL teacher often communicates with librarian and other teachers to find books that offer rich vocabulary and experiences that are appropriate for their age levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? When possible, the Neighborhood School makes use of SMART boards, interactive and visually interesting language videos, tutorials, software and games. We offer bilingual glossaries for content areas, as well as native language rich texts. There is a library of books on tape to which the ELLs have access. ELLs are also provided with leveled libraries so that students can read appropriate texts for their ability. All classrooms have computers, which are made accessible to the ELLs for further support. We also use a wide variety of graphic organizers and vocabulary lists for ELLs to support them in content-based instruction. White Board Laptops Classroom Computers Listening Centers 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In the first weeks of school, we foster relationships between families of ELLs. This often begins at the orientation meetings when families make their program choice. Many of our classroom parents often plan potluck picnics in the school yard, which is an excellent way to welcome new families to our school community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The Neighborhood School offers Espanol, taught by a fulltime, certified Spanish teacher five days per week and it is offered to every student in every grade throughout the school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: 0  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL teacher (1) participates in the same professional developments provided for classroom teachers. ENL teacher also selects PD that are relevelant and of interest throughtout the year. Same as above. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school supports staff to assist Ell’s as they transition from elementary school to middle school by providing teachers and staff with content area PD’s, overview of expectations for middle schools and invite teachers to conduct workshops to students about middle school expectations. Students in 5th grade also participate in an Advisory teams where they learn to confront transitional issues and developmental changes. Students also participate in conferencing about their goals for middle school and are given materials to continue developing their skills to prepare them for middle school. Parent coordinator also assists and coordinates tours to middle schools for both students and parents. Workshops are also provided to students about the middle school process. In addition, students that have not yet met performance levels are invited to attend summer school and enrichment programs. ENL teacher recieves PD opportunities sent from prinicapl or other related PD services. Teacher is encouraged to select PD that are most relevant and appropriate for his/her needs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents of our school community including all parents of English language learners participate in various school activities; these include celebrating student’s progress in writing (publishing parties) town meetings and they are offered out of school resources to assist them in working with their children, such as listings and information about public libraries and after school activities in their neighborhood. Our school has a parent association group that conducts various activities during the school year that fosters student’s activities, such as book sales, multicultural events and “All Family” school trip and all school picnics. Our parent coordinator works closely with our parent association to assure that parents of English language learners get equal access to information and activities; materials are translated and translators are made available for parents that speak other languages to assure their participation. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school parental involvement activities addresses the needs of our parents by providing them with an opportunity to familiarize with the processes of their children’s academic development and brings families into the classroom to collaborate with their children on an academic level. It also addresses concerns or questions parents may have in reference to their children and their families. These activities also include parents in the decision making for our school and their children. 1  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Dyanthe Spielberg, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Neighborhood School School DBN: 01M363 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dyanthe Spielberg Title Principal N/A Noemi Mora Sylvia Vidal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Denise Soltren Parent Alexis Neider Teacher/Subject Area Mara Dajevaskis Teacher/Subject Area n/a n/a Coach Coach Tina Cella School Counselor Daniella Phillips Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 01M363 School Name: The NeighborhoodSchool Superintendent: C The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We review the home language surveys (HLIS) and hold intake interviews with all families (in their home languages as necessary) to determine their language and translation needs. Beginning with our bilingual Spanish--English Parent Coordinator, the school is amply staffed with personnel who can serve as bilingual interpreters as necessary. Correspondence to parents is translated into home languages as necessary. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 5 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language We have about Spanish, chinese, polish, and portguese other than English, spoken at home. However, there are only a handful of families that require formal translation or oral interpretation services. These needs are reported to all teachers and providers who interface with them in the weekly faculty conferences held on Monday afternoons. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Some families make arrangements to have school materials translated at home by a relative or community member. When this is not possible, materials are translated in school before being sent home. Written translations are provided in school by bilingual parent volunteers, multi-lingual staff members or web-based translation services. 6  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Oral interpretation is provided for all family conferences, including EPCs and other face-to-face or phone meetings between parents and staff. For families who speak Spanish, French, or Chinese, the Neighborhood School has staff members who can provide oral interpretation. If a staff member is not available, or the family needs interpretation into another language, we use parent volunteers or hire a translation service to accommodate the family's language needs. We also work with outside agencies already involved with particular families to coordinate with translators already assigned to the family. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 7  The Neighborhood School's Translation and Interpretation Plan is laid out in Chancellor's Regulation A-663. As this regulation states, it is the obligation of this and every DOE school to ensure that limited English proficient parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child's education. This includes: 1. Specific Translation Requirements: the timely translation and distribution of critical communications into the covered languages including, but not limited to several specified areas, including English Language Learners. If a translation is not readily available, a cover letter or notice on the face of the English document should be made available in the appropriate covered language indicating how a parent can request a translation or interpretation of such document. Covered languages are: Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu. Translation services are obtained by contacting the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit, utilizing the translation/interpretation school funding allocations, accessing previously translated critical documents on the DOE website. It has already been stated above that the majority of office staff, beginning with the Principal, Milo Novelo, are bilingual Spanish--English at The Neighborhood School. Several classroom teachers and outside providers are as well. However, to the extent, there is still a need, there is recourse to the DOE T&I Unit. 2. Specific Interpretation Requirements: provide interpretation services either on-site or over-the-phone during regular business hours to parents whose primary language is a covered language and who request such services in order to communicate with the DOE regarding critical information about their child's education. Interpretation services are obtained by contacting the DOE T&I Unit at 718-752-7373 ext. 4 for over-the-phone interpretation services or utilizing the translation/interpretation school funding allocations. 3. Specific Notification Requirements: provide parents whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services in the appropriate covered languages. To do this, the school makes available to parents of ELLs translated versions of the Parent Bill of Rights and the Family Guide to NYC Schools. Multilingual signage which is available in the T&I Unit section of the DOE website is also on display at the Neighborhood School. 4. Specific Record-Keeping Requirements: The school maintains an appropriate and current record of the primary language of each parent. Such information is maintained in ATS and on the student emergency card. To meet this requirement, parent preference data is filled out on the Home Language Identification Survey and the Emergency Contact Card. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will monitor the feedback from parents to ensure quality and availabilty of services through parent surveys and family conferences. 8 
