 06M366 School Name: WASHINGTON HEIGHTS ACADEMY Principal: RENZO MARTINEZ   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS/IS 366: Washington Heights Academy 310600010366 Pre-Kindergarten – Grade 8 202 Sherman Avenue 212-304-3320 Phone Number: School Contact Person: Mr. Renzo Martinez Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Mr. Renzo Martinez Ms. Donna Donato Ms. Yesenia Aviles Ms. Nicole Bonheur School Number (DBN): 06M366 212-304-3322 Fax: Email Address: rmartin8@schools.nyc.gov SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Ms. Marlene Concepcion n/a Felix Matos (K-5 After School Program) / Vallerie Matos (6-8 After School Program) CBO Representative: Geographical District: 6 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Mr. Manuel Ramirez Superintendent: 4360 Broadway, Room 419 MRamire4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 917-521-3757 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue YuChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-356-7564 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mr. Renzo Martinez Ms. Donna Donato Ms. Susana Ramos Ms. Marlene Concepcion Ms. Nicole Bonheur Mr. Manuel Estrella Ms. Maria Santos *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/Teacher/SLT Chair Member/Teacher Member/Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ms. RomulaAnglero Ms. AnyelynMejia Ms. YeseniaAviles Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement: Section 4: CEP Overview PS/IS 366: Washington Heights Academy is a small district-wide school of choice that includes students in Pre-Kindergarten to Grade 8. The Academy serves a diverse neighborhood population that reflects the demographics of our surrounding community. 94% of students are Hispanic, 2% Black, 2% White, 2% Asian and 1% Other. 13% of   students are English Language Learners and 18% are Special Education students. Approximately 90% of students qualify for free or reduced price lunch. The mission of PS/IS 366: Washington Heights Academy is to prepare its students to respond to life’s challenges and opportunities with confidence and intelligence. Our aim is to provide children with learning experiences that will foster high self-esteem, academic success and responsible community involvement. Through high expectations and a rigorous academic curriculum, we strive to raise critical thinkers and self-directed learners, and to support in students a love of learning—now and throughout their lives. Our school philosophy is based on the following core principles: Relationship is at the heart of teaching and learning. An effective learning environment places meaningful relationships— among teachers, students, families and other community members—at its center. Family involvement is key to children’s academic success. Families play an essential role in their children’s education and should be invited to participate meaningfully in their children’s school lives. Children learn by doing. Children learn by handling materials, exploring their environments, planning projects and conducting experiments. Effective teaching encourages learning through discovery. Education is multi-dimensional. A well-rounded education should include not only mastery of information and skills, but opportunities for self-expression, artistic creation, personal reflection, critical thinking and the development of social, emotional and ethical competencies. . 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school has established partnerships with a diverse array of community-based organizations, including Inwood Community Services, which provides after school and vacation programming for our elementary and middle school students; the New York Cares School Success Initiative, which provides resources and volunteer support for a wide range of educational, recreational and family engagement activities; LEAP (Learning through an Expanded Arts Program), which offers visual arts enrichment for students in Kindergarten to Grade 2; Literacy, Inc. (LINC), which supports a Reading Buddies program for students in Grades 2 and 6; and the UFT-First Book Initiative, funded by the Astor Foundation, which helps families develop home libraries. In addition, we offer extra-curricular activities with several community-based organizations, including Children’s Arts and Science Workshops (Playwriting), New York Road Runners Club (Track & Field), and the Young People’s Chorus of New York City, which established its first community chorus at our school. Our middle school students also participate in Dance, Basketball and Soccer through the Department of Education’s CHAMPS program. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  13% of students are English Language Learners and 18% are Special Education students. We must continue to close the achievement gap for English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWDs). While 70% of our students in grades 3-8 scored Level 3 or 4 on the 2018 NYS ELA exam, only 17% of our ELLs demonstrated proficiency on the test. Similarly, while 67% of our students scored Level 3 or 4 on the 2018 NYS Math exam, only 17% of our ELLs demonstrated proficiency on the test. To address this need, School leadership will provide all teachers and paraprofessionals with monthly Professional Learning sessions focused on raising achievement for ELLs and SWDs, including ELL-SWDs, with support of Model Teachers, ELL and Special Education teachers. Our 2018-19 Instructional Focus - Cultivating a Growth Mindset through Co-Teaching, Flexible Grouping and Feedback - has been determined in response to this need. Grade band Professional Planning Teams will engage in regular cycles of Learning from Student Work, with a focus on ELLs, SWDs and ELL-SWDs. Grade band Professional Planning Teams will also conduct lesson studies in which they collaboratively develop, implement, reflect upon and adapt CCLS-aligned lessons using an established protocol to analyze the impact of targeted instructional strategies on learning outcomes for ELLs, SWDs and ELL-SWDs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of the Framework for Great Schools in which our school made the most progress over the past year is Collaborative Teachers. As noted in our most recent Quality Review, “weekly teacher team meetings allow all teachers across the school to regularly engage in collaborative planning, data analysis and decision making linked to schoolwide goals and initiatives.” In addition, “Teacher team use of protocols for investigation of strengths and needs in student work and data, along with teacher voice in school level decisions, contributes to improvement of teacher practice and student mastery of learning goals.” A key area of focus for our school during the 2018-2019 school year will be Growth Mindset, with a continued focus on Danielson 3c: Engaging Students in Learning. As suggested in our most recent Quality Review, we must ensure that all teachers consistently use instructional strategies that engage students at all levels, incorporate rigorous tasks, and immerse all students in deep peer-to-peer discussions linked to complex texts in order to foster higher order thinking and high quality student work products across all disciplines. Our instructional focus will be further supported by professional learning and schoolwide initiatives focusing on the interrelated areas of Supportive Environment (Danielson 2a: Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport) and Strong Family-Community Ties. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M366 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 571 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 41 30 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 82.0% % Reduced Lunch 12.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 93.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.26 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 69.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 90% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 30 30 93.8% 8.4% 15.6% 1.8% 1.9% 0.7% 4 37% 8.7 67.1% 64% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school’s 2018 NYS Exam scores for English Language Arts and Mathematics were higher than citywide averages and significantly higher than the large majority of in-district schools with similar demographics. 70% of students met State standards on the NYS ELA test, and 67% met State standards on the NYS Math test. The percentage of students scoring at Level 1 on the ELA exam dropped from 6.9% to 4.9% while the percentage scoring at Level 1 on Math remained approximately the same (8.7% to 8.9%). We must continue to close the achievement gap for English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWDs). While 70% of our students in grades 3-8 scored Level 3 or 4 on the 2018 NYS ELA exam, only 17% of our ELLs demonstrated proficiency on the test. Similarly, while 67% of our students scored Level 3 or 4 on the 2018 NYS Math exam, only 17% of our ELLs demonstrated proficiency on the test. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in Grades 3-8 will demonstrate progress in Math as indicated in a 2% decrease in the number of students scoring at Level 1 on the 2018 State Math assessment. The percentage of students scoring at Level 1 on the State Math exam will decrease from approximately 9% to 7%. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School leadership has budgeted for additional SETSS teacher and additional ELL teacher to provide more targeted instruction and closer collaboration between SpEd, ELL and classroom teachers. School leadership will provide all teachers and paraprofessionals with monthly Professional Learning sessions focused on co-teaching as a means of raising achievement for ELLs and SWDs, including ELL-SWDs, with support of Model Teachers, ELL and Special Education teachers Teachers and Paraprofessionals September 2018 to June 2019 ● Principal & Assistant Principals ● ELL & Special Education Coordinators Teachers and Paraprofessionals October 2018 to May 2019 ● Principal & Assistant Principals ● Model Teachers ● ELL & Special Education Coordinators Grade band Professional Planning Teams will engage in regular cycles of Learning from Student Work, with a focus on ELLs, SWDs and ELL-SWDs. Professional Planning Teams October 2018 – May 2019 ● Principal & Assistant Principals Grade band Professional Planning Teams will conduct lesson studies in which they collaboratively develop, implement, reflect upon and adapt CCLS-aligned lessons using an established protocol to analyze the impact of targeted instructional strategies on learning outcomes for ELLs, SWDs and ELL-SWDs. Professional Planning Teams October 2018 – May 2019 ● Lead Teacher Team & Model Teachers ● Professional Planning Teams ● Principal & Assistant Principals ● Lead Teacher Team & Model Teachers ● Professional Planning Teams 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. From November 2018 - March 2019, the school will implement a series of Family Engagement Workshops focused on supportive environment. Topics will include: Social-Emotional Learning; Cultivating a Growth Mindset at Home; College and Career Readiness across all grade levels. Teachers will be provided with Professional Development to support the planning and implementation of Family Engagement Workshops. Communicate regularly with students and families through various media (e.g., website, school app, newsletters, flyers, phone calls) to advertise workshops and raise awareness. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Principal, Assistant Principals, ELL Coordinator, Special Education Coordinator, ELL and Special Education staff Instructional Resources: ELL consultant, Professional Development, Scaffolded Support from Core Curriculum, NYSESLAT materials, MyON, Learning A-Z Per Session will include Extended Day, Saturday Academy and Teacher Implementation of Family Engagement Workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 1% of students who scored at Level 1 on the 2018 Math Exam will score at Level 2 as measured by the I-Ready Math Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) iReady Diagnostic Assessment - Math Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school’s 2018 NYS Exam scores for English Language Arts and Mathematics were higher than citywide averages and significantly higher than the large majority of in-district schools with similar demographics. 70% of students met State standards on the NYS ELA test, and 67% met State standards on the NYS Math test. The percentage of students scoring at Level 1 on the ELA exam dropped from 6.9% to 4.9% while the percentage scoring at Level 1 on Math remained approximately the same (8.7% to 8.9%). Despite these strong statistics, we believe that we can do more to fully engage our students. Our most recent Quality Review noted that in some classrooms, “teachers assigned rigorous Common Core aligned tasks, with students citing evidence to respond to questions and/or reporting on findings from inquiry based tasks.” The reviewer also noted, however, that some lessons “did not consistently demonstrate use of multiple entry points to meet the diverse needs of students” and did not offer sufficient opportunities for high level peer-to-peer discussions or consistently rigorous student work products. These findings are corroborated by classroom observations and schoolwide Advance ratings, which indicate room for growth in Danielson Framework Component 3c: Engaging Students in Learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 50% of teachers will have experienced movement of .5 from BOY to EOY scores in Danielson Component 3c: engaging Students in Learning as reflected in Advance. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School leadership will provide all teachers and paraprofessionals with a minimum of five Professional Learning Sessions focused on strengthening our instructional practices in relation to Danielson Component 3c: Engaging Students in Learning. Teachers and Paraprofessionals October 2018 - May 2019 ● Principal & Assistant Principals ● Model Teachers & Lead Teacher Team ● PD Planning Committee ● Principal & Assistant Principals ● Model Teachers & Lead Teacher Team ● PD Planning Committee ● Principal & Assistant Principals ● Lead Teacher Team ● Professional Planning Teams ● Principal & Assistant Principals ● Lead Teacher Team ● Professional Planning Teams All teachers and paraprofessionals will read and discuss a minimum of three professional articles about effective strategies for engaging, supporting and challenging all students - including English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities - with a focus on Co-Teaching, Flexible Grouping and Feedback. Teachers and Paraprofessionals October 2018 - May 2019 Grade band Professional Planning Teams will engage in cycles of intervisitations with a focus on Danielson Component 3c: Engaging Students in Learning. Professional Planning Teams October 2018– May 2019 Grade band Professional Planning Teams will conduct lesson studies in which they collaboratively develop, implement, reflect upon and adapt CCLS-aligned lessons using an established protocol to analyze the impact of engagement on student learning outcomes. Professional Planning Teams October 2018 – May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 7  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. From November 2018 - March 2019, the school will implement a series of Family Engagement Workshops focused on supportive environment. Topics will include: Social-Emotional Learning; Cultivating a Growth Mindset at Home; College and Career Readiness across all grade levels. Teachers will be provided with Professional Development to support the planning and implementation of Family Engagement Workshops. Communicate regularly with students and families through various media (e.g., website, school app, newsletters, flyers, phone calls) to advertise workshops and raise awareness. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: Principal, Assistant Principals, Model Teachers, PD Planning Committee, Lead Teachers Instructional resources: Professional books and articles on effective strategies for student engagement with a focus on Co-Teaching, Flexible Grouping and Feedback Per Session to support Teacher Implementation of Family Engagement Workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point Benchmark 1 : By February 2019, 25% of teachers will have experienced movement of .5 from BOY to EOY scores in Danielson Component 2a: Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport as reflected in Advance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Framework - Advance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school’s 2018 NYS Exam scores for English Language Arts and Mathematics were higher than citywide averages and significantly higher than the large majority of in-district schools with similar demographics. 70% of students met State standards on the NYS ELA test, and 67% met State standards on the NYS Math test. The percentage of students scoring at Level 1 on the ELA exam dropped from 6.9% to 4.9% while the percentage scoring at Level 1 on Math remained approximately the same (8.7% to 8.9%). While our schoolwide Proficiency Rates on grade 5-8 NYC Math Performance Task (MoSL) exceeded both District and Citywide percentages, our fifth and sixth grade students did not perform as strongly as students in grades 7-8. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Grade 5-8 Inquiry Team members will collaboratively analyze Math performance tasks to improve students’ problem solving skills as measured by a 5% percent increase in students scoring at or above pass proficiency rate in grade 5 and 6 on the 2019 NYC Math Performance Task (MoSL). 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School Leadership has invested in Model Teacher for Math who will support teachers in implementation of Math Performance Tasks at all grade levels. K-8 Math Teachers September 2018-June 2019 School Leadership will provide all teachers and paraprofessionals with monthly Professional Learning sessions focused on implementation and assessment of Math Performance Tasks Teachers and Paraprofessionals October 2018-May 2019 Grade-band Professional Planning Teams will engage in regular cycles of Learning from Student Work, with a focus on collaborative assessment of Math Performance Tasks Professional Planning Teams October 2018-May 2019 Grade-band Professional Planning Teams will conduct lesson studies in which they collaboratively develop, implement, reflect upon and adapt CCLS-aligned Math Performance Tasks, using an established protocol to analyze their impact on student learning outcomes Professional Planning Teams October 2018-May 2019 ● Principal & Assistant Principals ● Model Teacher - Math ● Principal & Assistant Principals ● Model Teachers & Lead Teacher Team ● PD Planning Committee ● Principal & Assistant Principals ● Lead Teacher Team & Model Teachers ● Professional Planning Teams ● Principal & Assistant Principals ● Lead Teacher Team & Model Teachers ● Professional Planning Teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 0  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. From November 2018 - March 2019, the school will implement a series of Family Engagement Workshops focused on rigorous instruction and the NYS Standards. Topics will include: Developing Children's Mathematical Vocabulary; Using Digital Learning Tools to Support Math Achievement at Home; Preparing for the NYS Tests. Teachers will be provided with Professional Development to support the planning and implementation of Family Engagement Workshops. Communicate regularly with students and families through various media (e.g., website, school app, newsletters, flyers, phone calls) to advertise workshops and raise awareness. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Principal, Assistant Principals, ELL Coordinator, Special Education Coordinator, Math Model Teacher, ELL and Special Education staff Instructional Resources: Professional Development, Scaffolded Support from Core Curriculum, IXL, ThinkCentral, Go Math Performance Tasks Per Session will include Extended Day, Saturday Academy and Teacher Implementation of Family Engagement Workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Inquiry Team members in grades 5-8 will collaboratively analyze Math Performance Tasks to improve students’ problem solving skills as measured by a 2% percent increase in grade 5-6 students scoring at or above pass proficiency rate in the January 2019 Simulation that includes a performance based task. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Ready Math Simulation, including Ready Math Performance Task Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school’s 2018 NYS Exam scores for English Language Arts and Mathematics were higher than citywide averages and significantly higher than the large majority of in-district schools with similar demographics. 70% of students met State standards on the NYS ELA test, and 67% met State standards on the NYS Math test. The percentage of students scoring at Level 1 on the ELA exam dropped from 6.9% to 4.9% while the percentage scoring at Level 1 on Math remained approximately the same (8.7% to 8.9%). We must continue to close the achievement gap for English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWDs). While 70% of our students in grades 3-8 scored Level 3 or 4 on the 2018 NYS ELA exam, only 17% of our ELLs demonstrated proficiency on the test. Similarly, while 67% of our students scored Level 3 or 4 on the 2018 NYS Math exam, only 17% of our ELLs demonstrated proficiency on the test. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will implement a Professional Learning Plan that builds teachers’ capacity to cultivate Growth Mindset classrooms through Co-Teaching, Flexible Grouping and Feedback. As a result of instructional leadership, 75% of teachers will experience growth of at least .5 in average in Danielson Components 3b, 3c, 3d as reflected in Advance. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School leadership will provide all teachers and paraprofessionals with a minimum of five Professional Learning Sessions focused on strengthening our instructional practices in relation to Danielson Component 3c: Engaging Students in Learning. All Teachers and Paraprofessionals October 2018 - May 2019 ● Principal & Assistant Principals ● Model Teachers & Lead Teacher Team ● PD Planning Committee ● Principal & Assistant Principals ● Model Teachers & Lead Teacher Team ● PD Planning Committee ● Principal & Assistant Principals ● Lead Teacher Team ● Professional Planning Teams ● Principal & Assistant Principals ● Lead Teacher Team ● Professional Planning Teams All teachers and paraprofessionals will read and discuss a minimum of three professional articles about effective strategies for engaging, supporting and challenging all students - including English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities - with a focus on Co-Teaching, Flexible Grouping and Feedback. All Teachers and Paraprofessionals October 2018 - May 2019 Grade band Professional Planning Teams will engage in cycles of intervisitations with a focus on Danielson Component 3c: Engaging Students in Learning. Professional Planning Teams October 2018 - May 2019 Grade band Professional Planning Teams will conduct lesson studies in which they collaboratively develop, implement, reflect upon and adapt CCLS-aligned lessons using an established protocol to analyze the impact of engagement on student learning outcomes. Professional Planning Teams October 2018 - May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 3  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. From November 2018 - March 2019, the school will implement a series of Family Engagement Workshops focused on supportive environment. Topics will include: Social-Emotional Learning; Cultivating a Growth Mindset at Home; College and Career Readiness across all grade levels. Teachers will be provided with Professional Development to support the planning and implementation of Family Engagement Workshops. Communicate regularly with students and families through various media (e.g., website, school app, newsletters, flyers, phone calls) to advertise workshops and raise awareness. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: Principal, Assistant Principals, Model Teachers, PD Planning Committee, Lead Teachers Instructional resources: Professional books and articles on effective strategies for student engagement with a focus on Co-Teaching, Flexible Grouping and Feedback Per Session to support Teacher Implementation of Family Engagement Workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 30% of teachers will experience growth of at least .5 in average in Danielson Components 3b, 3c, 3d as reflected in Advance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Framework - Advance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strong Family and Community Ties have been a central part of the vision of Washington Heights Academy since the school’s inception. The school creates a welcoming environment for families through PTA meetings, parent workshops, and well-attended family outreach events such as Open School Night, Parent-Teacher Conferences and Student Recognition Ceremonies. In response to the 2018 NYC School Survey, only 74% of families indicated that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. Based on this data, we have identified a need to provide more opportunities for families to provide volunteer support. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school administration, teachers and staff will collaborate with parents to increase the percentage of families indicating that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school from 74% to 80%. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Perform outreach to Community-Based Organizations to establish opportunities to train parents and other family members to provide volunteer service to the school. Community-Based Organizations September 2018 to June 2019 ● Principal/Assistant Principals ● Parent Coordinator ● PTA/SLT Establish and maintain clear expectations regarding the role of parents and teachers in supporting strong Home-School Connections. Teachers and Families September 2018 to June 2019 ● Principal/Assistant Principals ● Parent Coordinator ● PTA/SLT Plan and implement Family Learning Nights that will provide opportunities for parents and teachers to engage in activities designed to strengthen Home-School Connections. Teachers and Families November 2018 to April 2019 ● Principal/Assistant Principals ● Parent Coordinator ● PTA/SLT Families September 2018 to June 2019 ● Principal/Assistant Principals ● Parent Coordinator ● PTA/SLT Communicate regularly with students and families through various media (e.g., website, school app, newsletters, flyers, phone calls) to advertise Family Learning Nights and encourage family participation. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable.  NY Cares School Success Initiative  Inwood Community Services 6   LEAP (Learning through an Expanded Arts Program) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Parent-Teacher Association, School Leadership Team Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will review family volunteer participation rates at Family Learning Nights and other schoolwide events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Sign-In Sheets from Family Learning Nights, planning sessions and other schoolwide events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) English Language Arts (ELA)  DRA  BOY, MOY and EOYiReadyDiagnostic Tests  Running Records,  Ready ELA Simulations Mathematics Science  ReadyGEN Interventions  Tiered Tasks  Scaffolded Strategies Handbook  Guided Reading  Reading A-Z  Phonics Instruction  Reading Reform Fundations   Go Math: Interventions  Re-Teach   Book Strategic Intervention Activities Intensive Intervention Activities  Mega Math  Soar to Success  Animated Math Models Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) small groups   one-to-one  push-in/pullout  small groups  one-to-one  push-in/pullout  small groups  one-to-one  push-in/pullout When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.)  Three times per week or more  Three times per week or more  Two times per week or more  BOY, MOY and EOYiReadyDiagnostic Tests  Ready Math Simulations  Go Math Chapter Tests  Science Simulations Measuring Up Science Curriculum 8  Social Studies  Passport to Social Studies End Unit Tasks At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.)  Responsive Classroom  Advisory  PBIS  Tiered Tasks  Scaffolded Strategies  Guided Reading  Reading A-Z  Guidance Counselor  small groups  one-to-one  push-in/pullout  small groups  one-to-one  Two times per week or more  As needed 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 45 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students and families in Temporary Housing will receive support from our Guidance Counselor. School will purchase uniforms and school supplies as needed, as well as assist with student transportation needs. Families will be connected to neighborhood agencies and social services for additional support. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All of our school’s current teachers are deemed Highly Qualified. To recruit highly qualified teachers, administrators attend teaching fairs and review resumes submitted on the DOE online Open Market system to find teachers with relevant skills and experience, who are interviewed by our Hiring Committee as part of the application and hiring process. New and untenured teachers are supported by state-required Mentoring and Professional Development to meet state licensing requirements. Veteran teachers are offered leadership opportunities to support their continued growth within the school, and have a voice in school leadership through school-wide positions (e.g., Grade Team Leader, Professional Development Planning Committee, School Leadership Team). 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All teachers and paraprofessionals participate in ongoing Professional Learning activities both within and outside of the school. Our Professional Development Planning Committee and Lead Teacher Team helps to identify schoolwide needs and to develop topics for Professional Learning. On-site Professional Learning sessions are facilitated by members of the Instructional Leadership Team (Principal, Assistant Principal, Curriculum Coordinator, Data & Assessment Specialist, ELL Staff Developer). Initiatives introduced in schoolwide sessions are often extended via Professional Planning Team (PPT) meetings, which are facilitated by members of the Lead Teacher Team. Generation Ready (formerly AUSSIE) provides on-site planning support for ELA curriculum and instruction. Reading Reform provides on-site training for classroom teachers in Pre-Kindergarten to Grade 2. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2  n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The majority of our Kindergarten students come from our 3 full-day Pre-Kindergarten classes, easing the transition from pre-school to elementary school for both children and parents. Pre-Kindergarten staff participates in all Professional Learning activities, including school wide Professional Learning Sessions, and the Lead Pre-K teacher is a member of the Lead Teacher Team. Early Childhood teachers (PreK-Grade 1) often collaborate in the context of Professional Learning sessions and classroom intervisitations.The Pre-Kindergarten Professional Planning Team (PPT) meets weekly to discuss curriculum and instruction and to look at student work. Pre-K parents are members of the Parent-Teacher Association and are invited to participate in all school wide activities. Official Pre-K records are transferred as part of the Kindergarten registration process, and Pre-K teachers provide advice about student placement and intervention services. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Under the new Teacher Evaluation System, a MoSL Committee of teachers and administrators was formed. The Committee met and determined which Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) to use for our school’s local measures. In addition, teachers are regularly involved in selecting and utilizing multiple assessment measures through weekly participation in schoolwide Professional Learning sessions, Lead Teacher Meetings and Professional Planning Team (PPT) meetings. Ongoing, formative and summative data for Reading, Writing and Math is obtained from iReady computer-based assessments, DRA administration, guided reading sessions, individual reading conferences, pre- and post-unit writing assessments, end-of-chapter assessments, end-of-unit performance-based assessments, simulated exams and state tests. Data is collected, disaggregated and analyzed through a schoolwide data system that tracks subgroups (ELLs, SWDs, lowest and highest achievers) at classroom, grade and school wide levels. Regularly scheduled common planning periods allow teachers to collaboratively plan CCLS-aligned curriculum and instruction, including appropriate differentiation for ELLs and SWDs. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 3  for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A, 5B, 5E: Part 4b Section 5A, 5B, 5E: Part 4b Section 5A, 5B, 5E: Part 4b Section 5A, 5B, 5E: Part 4b Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 289,610.00 Title II, Part A Federal 24,173.00 Title III, Part A Federal 11,200.00 Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,618,022.00 x x x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use. 4   A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS/IS 366: Washington Heights Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS/IS 366: Washington Heights Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 6  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 7  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/IS 366: Washington Heights Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 8  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 9  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 0  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 1  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: Overview: During the 2018-2019 school year, a Title III ELL Academic Enhancement Program will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:40-4:40 PM. The program will begin on Wednesday, November 7, 2018 during the Fall term and continue until Thursday, May 9, 2019 during the Spring term. By scheduling Title III programming directly after regular dismissal, we will maintain consistent student attendance as well as strong levels of integration between Title III programming and content area instruction in order to enrich students' English language and academic skills. Because we are a conceptually consolidated school, additional costs for the Title III program will be supplemented by other school funding sources. Approximately 62% of ELLs (44 out of 70 tested) scored as Expanding on the Spring 2018 NYSESLAT. Review of Spring 2018 NYSESLAT data reveals the following trends among current ELLs in Grades 2-8: 62 % (44 out of 70) attained an overall level of EXPANDING 22% (16 out of 70) attained an overall level of TRANSITIONING 11% (8 out of 70) attained an overall level of EMERGING 2% (2 out of 70) attained an overall level of ENTERING Program Rationale: In response to this data, our Title III funding will be used to support a standards-based ESL supplemental program designed to develop students' English language skills, to accelerate the acquisition of academic English, and to support high levels of achievement across all subject areas through content-based ELL instruction. Students at the Expanding level will be offered the push they need to score as Commanding on the 2019 NYSESLAT, while Entering, Emerging and Transitioning students will receive targeted support to help them proceed to the next level. ESL- and bilingual-licensed teachers in the program will reinforce students' oral language skills with an emphasis on small-group collaboration as scaffolding for the continued development of literacy, academic vocabulary and content area knowledge. To maintain high levels of achievement in all grade level standards, the program will also include targeted Listening/Speaking practice and differentiated Reading/Writing instruction. To meet their needs as second language learners, students in the Title III ELL Academic Enhancement Program will engage in interactive read-alouds, guided reading, shared writing and differentiated writing instruction. Questioning and discussion protocols, small group projects, hands-on activities and reader's theater will engage student interest and strengthen communication and collaboration skills. These instructional practices will offer ample opportunities for Title III instructors to offer authentic language practice, to enrich students' use of academic English, and to provide targeted feedback across all modalities. Grade Levels and Sub-Groups: The Title III ELL Academic Enhancement Program will serve English Language Learners in Grades 2-8, including newcomers, developing ELLs, long term ELLs and SWD-ELLs. Students will be organized according to grade level in groups no larger than 15, with no more than two continuous grade levels per group. Instruction will be differentiated in accordance with formative 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information and summative assessment data, including students' current NYSESLAT levels and specific needs within each language modality. Based on current data, we are confident that our proposed Title III program will significantly improve student achievement across all grades and proficiency levels. Schedule and Duration: The program will begin on Wednesday, November 7, 2018 and will continue until Thursday, May 9, 2019. We will provide 44 sessions of after school instruction. Each session will last two hours. Because we are a conceptually consolidated school, additional costs for the Title III program will be supplemented by other school funding sources. Language of Instruction: The language of instruction will be English, with appropriate language scaffolding and supports, in keeping with our school's current ENL model. Certified Teachers: Instruction for the Title III ELL Academic Enhancement Program will be provided by students' assigned teachers, who have the strongest familiarity with their students' needs. During the current school year, to the greatest degree possible, English Language Learners have been grouped in one class per grade level, with teachers who hold both Common Branch and ESL or bilingual licenses. These teachers will form the core of our Title III program staff. A total of 5 bilingual or ESL-licensed teachers will participate in the Title III program. The school's Assistant Principal, with the support of the ELL Coordinator, will oversee the program's implementation and monitor student attendance and progress at no cost to Title III. Because we are a conceptually consolidated school, additional costs for the Title III program will be supplemented by other school funding sources. Materials: Teachers will use a variety of materials, including Continental’s “Get Ready” books to support content area learning in Reading, Writing and Math. In addition, bilingual glossaries, Continental's “New York ELLs” and “Finish Line for ELLs: English Proficiency Practice” will provide NYSESLAT practice across all modalities. In addition, we will incorporate the on-line reading program, Reading A-Z, which provides leveled books in various genres. These resources will allow students to improve their reading comprehension while promoting the development of higher order thinking skills. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: We will provide a strong professional development program for all teachers of ELLs and former ELLs during the current school year. Our ELL Team will attend the series of ELL Lead Professonal Learning sessions offered by the Manhattan Field Support Center ELL Team. The series of workshops will facilitate continuous learning among ELL educators by deepening participants' understanding and knowledge of ELL policies and effective instruction, with an instructional focus on literacy across disciplines. This series will use the knowledge-building approach to developing language in unit design within an Advanced Literacy framework. Participants will learn to design instructional units for knowledge building in content areas and reflect on their practices in the classrooms to affect students’ learning. Topics will include: 5  Part C: Professional Development 1) Knowledge-building approach to developing language – Unit Design in Advanced Literacy Framework 2) Design learning tasks in content area units 3) Scaffold Interactive Learning tasks in units 4) Bring It Together – Units for ENL Co-teaching and Stand-Alone Classrooms 5) Share of Learning – What Was the Impact on Learning? In addition, a consultant will provide monthly professional development sessions on second language acquisition, ENL methodologies, and content-based ELL instruction. The following professional development program has been designed in response to NYSESLAT, ELA and Math data analysis as well as the expressed needs of our teachers: November 2018: Unpacking the NYSESLAT Targeted Audience: All teachers and paraprofessionals (during Monday Professional Learning session) Provider: Lucia Buttaro (Touro College) December 2018: Blueprint for English Language Learner Success Targeted Audience: All teachers and paraprofessionals during Monday Professional Learning session Provider: Lucia Buttaro (Touro College) January 2019: Introduction to the New York State Next Generation English Language Arts Learning Standards Targeted Audience: All classroom teachers, via grade-level Professional Planning Team meetings Provider: Lucia Buttaro (Touro College) February 2019: English as a New Language: Integrated Partnerships in the ENL Classroom Targeted Audience: All teachers and paraprofessionals during Monday Professional Learning session Provider: Lucia Buttaro (Touro College) March 2019: Differentiating ELL Instruction Across the Content Areas (ELA/Social Studies) Targeted Audience: All teachers and paraprofessionals during Monday Professional Learning session Provider: Lucia Buttaro (Touro College) April 2019: Differentiating ELL Instruction Across the Content Areas (Math/Science) Targeted Audience: All teachers and paraprofessionals during Monday Professional Learning session Provider: Lucia Buttaro (Touro College) May 2019: Embedding Effective Scaffolds for ELLs in Content-Area Curriculum Maps Targeted Audience: All teachers and paraprofessionals during Monday Professional Learning session Provider: Lucia Buttaro (Touro College) Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 6  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Administration, ENL Teachers, and Parent Coordinator will work closely together to provide meaningful ELL parent engagement activities with the specific aim of supporting higher achievement for English Language Learners. ESL- and bilingual-licensed teachers will hold monthly ELL Parent Workshops on a variety of topics, including: November 2018: Home-School Connections: Supporting Language and Academic Learning December 2018: Home Language as an Asset for Multilingual Learners January 2019: Laying the Groundwork for the NYSESLAT February 2019: Supporting Literacy Development through Oral Language March 2019: Enhancing Acquisition of Academic English April 2019: Using Technology to Support Academic Language and Vocabulary May 2019: Summer Learning Activities to Support Language Development In order to foster higher levels of attendance, Parent Workshops will take place on various days of the week and at various times of day to accommodate diverse parent schedules. Through our partnership with the New York Cares School Success Initiative, we will continue to provide Adult ESL classes during the current school year. Classes will be offered on a weekly basis - on one weekday morning as well as during the school's Saturday Academy program. We will survey parents to identify additional areas of need. All records, including agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parents' preferred languages will be kept in Compliance Binders in the ENL office. In addition, cultural nights, book clubs and museum trips will be scheduled throughout the year, with at least three major events taking place each term. These activities will provide students and family members with opportunities to expand their English language skills while gaining greater awareness of the external resources available to families throughout New York City Families will be notified of these activities through flyers, school door postings and phone calls from our Parent Coordinator and school support staff. All communications will be provided in English and translated into languages spoken at home. We will work closely with bilingual staff in school and district-wide to ensure that appropriate translation services are provided at all meetings, workshops and events. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 7  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 6 School Name PS/IS 366: Washington Heights Academy Borough Manhattan School Number 366 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Renzo Martinez Coach Lynne Doherty Herndon ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Maria Reynoso, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Sorangel Solpiaget, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Cynthia Rivera, Grade 4 Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal Mercedes Diaz Coach Nicole Bonheur School Counselor Antoinette Ansalone Parent Marilandia Barrientos Parent Coordinator Alexandra Ulloa Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 7 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 458 9 Total number of ELLs 86 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 18.78%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Teachers in Kindergarten and Grade 1 use the Developmental Reading Assessment (DRA) to assess the early literacy skills of all students. In Kindergarten, teachers use components of the TCWRP, which provides benchmarks for concepts of print, as well as letter and sound identification. These assessments provide information that complements and augments the data provided by NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores. The DRA identifies students’ guided and independent reading levels as well as reading strengths and weaknesses. DRA Word Analysis evaluates the phonological awareness and phonics skills of students in Kindergarten and early First Grade, and the word analysis skills of below-grade-level readers in other grades. In Grade 2 through middle school, we use computer-based iReady reading assessments, which yield student-by-student data aligned to specific reading skills. ELL progress is monitored throughout the year, and teachers use this information to plan and implement targeted instruction for students. In order to support our ELLs in literacy, teachers work with the ReadyGEN curriculum (K-5) and Expeditionary Learning (Middle 0  School), using scaffolded strategies for reading and writing during small group instruction. Because the levels of the full-class anchor texts included in these curricula are often above the independent reading levels of our ELLs, teachers augment the curriculum with Guided Reading instruction for at least 4 periods per week in the regular classroom and in ELL pull-out groups. Teachers draw upon strategies from the CAFE system (Comprehension, Accuracy, Fluency, Expanding Vocabulary) to support guided and independent reading, and use these strategies as the basis of small group instruction and individual reading conferences. Reading assessment data is collected and disaggregated by class, by grade level and on a school wide basis in order to identify trends that will further inform instruction. Teachers scaffold writing tasks to support ELLs as needed, using ongoing observation and formative assessment to determine which scaffolds will most effectively support students in the successful completion of each task. Teachers also use the Traits of Writing to support student writing conferences, with a consistent system of conferencing notes used in all classrooms, as well as task-specific rubrics to assess students’ strengths and weaknesses across content areas and types of writing. Summative writing assessment data and performance-based assessment data is collected and disaggregated by class, by grade level and on a school wide basis in order to identify trends that will further inform instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our ELL Professional Planning Team has developed systems for monitoring the progress of ELLs throughout the school year. At the beginning of the school year, each ELL teacher creates an ELL Data Cover Sheet for each student, which includes relevant IEP information, current NYSITELL or NYSESLAT level and sub-scores, current reading data (based on DRA or iReady results), and New York State exam results for students in Grades 3-7. Each ELL teacher also creates Individual Language Goals for all students. In addition to CCLS-aligned Reading and Writing goals, which are developed in collaboration with the general classroom teachers, ELL teachers identify CCLS-aligned Listening and Speaking goals for each student. Teachers periodically review and revise student goals, setting new learning goals as initial goals are met. ELL and classroom teachers monitor student progress through formative and summative assessments, conferencing and observational data. Reading and Writing data (derived from DRAs, iReady assessment and performance-based writing tasks) is disaggregated by sub-groups, including ELL, SWD and ELL-SWD, so that we can closely monitor the progress of specific groups of students and adjust instructional plans as needed. Teachers generate mid-year Progress Reports for all students at the end of January, after the second round of DRA and/or iReady testing. At that time, we disaggregate data from multiple sources (e.g., DRA/iReady, test simulations, end-of-unit performance-based assessments, and end-of-unit tests in literacy and math) to assess the progress of ELLs and adjust our instructional program accordingly. Our students’ performances on the 2015 NYSITELL, NYSESLAT and NYS exams provide essential data that will help us to further evaluate the effectiveness of ELL instruction. We will continue instructional practices that have proven to be successful in the past, analyze our areas of challenge and collaboratively identify change strategies that can be implemented to improve student performance. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Students’ specific areas of need are identified, and their individual progress tracked, using data from NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, New York State ELA and Math exams, DRA, iReady on-line Reading and Math assessments, and predictive and interim assessments 1  as well as formative, summative and performance-based classroom assessments across the content areas. Disaggregation of assessment data by sub-groups (ELL, SWD, ELL-SWD) allows us to identify trends and adjust our instructional program as needed. Following the guidelines delineated in the RTI Guide for Teachers of ELLs, we provide Tier 1 intervention for students based on identified areas of need. Tier I interventions include targeted, differentiated, small group instruction provided by designated staff throughout the school day. Because DRA data indicates that many of our ELLs are not yet reading on grade level, a major focus of Tier 1 intervention is Guided Reading across the content areas, supported by Reading A-Z, fiction and non-fiction guided reading collections, and curriculum-related, thematic book sets. In the lower grades, teachers also use Reading Reform to support early literacy development. Students in need of Tier II interventions receive at-risk SETSS (staffing and scheduling permitting) and are closely monitored by classroom teachers, out-of-classroom teachers, guidance and administration so they can be referred for special education evaluations if warranted. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns indicate that our English Language Learners are progressing at all grade levels. Of our current ELLs in Kindergarten to Grade 7, 72% scored at the Expanding level on the 2015 NYSITELL or NYSESLAT. Only one student scored at the Entering level on the 2015 NYSESLAT. The majority of students scoring at the Emerging and Transitioning levels are in Kindergarten to Grade 4. In Grades 5-7, 17 out of 20 of ELLs (85%) tested at the Expanding level, with only 1 student per grade in Grades 5-7 scoring as Emerging or Transitioning. 27 out of 91 students (approximately 30%) tested as Proficient on the 2014 NYSESLAT. In 2015, 11 out of 73 (approximately 15%) tested as Commanding. These data patterns indicate that our ELLs are making steady progress, with the majority testing out by the end of Grade 5. Of the 23 ELLs who have received 4-6 years of services, 15 (65%) are SWDs, which was a factor in our lower-than-usual pass rate on the 2015 NYSESLAT in the upper grades. Our 2015 pass rate was also impacted by the large number of ELLs who had tested as Proficient in Spring 2014. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We adhere to all regulations delineated in CR Part 154.2 for delivery of ELL instruction to students at each proficiency level. Students at the Entering and Emerging levels receive 2 units (360 minutes) per week of mandated ELL instruction: 1 unit (180 minutes) of Stand-Alone ENL plus 1 unit (180 minutes) of Integrated ENL. Students at the Transitioning level receive 1 unit (180 minutes) per week: .5 unit of Stand-Alone ENL plus .5 unit of Stand-Alone OR Integrated ENL. Students at the Expanding level receive 1 unit (180 minutes) per week of Integrated ENL. Students athe Commanding level continue to receive .5 unit (90 minutes) per week of Integrated ENL for two years after exiting 2  ELL status. Stand-Alone ENL instruction is provided by a certified ESOL Teacher. Integrated ENL instruction is delivered by 2 individually certified teachers (1 Common Branch/Content Area teacher + 1 certified ESOL teacher) OR by one teacher who holds both certifications. Our school currently has two full-time, licensed ESOL teachers assigned to our ENL program, each focusing on a specific grade band (K-3 and 4-7). This organizational model allows each ENL teacher to collaborate closely with the general classroom teachers within and across grade levels to plan curriculum and to tailor instruction to meet the needs of the ELLs in each class. Instruction is delivered through a combination of Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ENL (depending on students' proficiency levels) that allows ELLs to keep pace with their peers in the general education classroom, while providing opportunities for targeted small-group instruction, with an emphasis on listening and speaking tasks that will support oral language development as well as literacy skills. An ELL Professional Planning Team (PPT) meets on a weekly basis in order to set goals, plan instruction and develop systems for monitoring student progress. General education classrooms at Washington Heights Academy are intentionally heterogeneous, with most classes including a mix of general education students, SWDs, ELLs, and students performing below, at and above grade level. ELLs are generally grouped by grade and proficiency level for Stand-Alone ENL instruction. On occasion, a Stand-Alone ENL group may include students at the same level of proficiency from two grade levels (e.g., K/1 Entering or Grade 2/3 Emerging ). Students who are deemed to be high-need may receive additional small-group instruction that is targeted to their specific needs. b. TBE program. If applicable. not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We adhere to all regulations delineated in CR Part 154.2 to deliver mandated minutes of ELL instruction to students at each proficiency level. Students at the Entering and Emerging levels receive 2 units (360 minutes) per week: 1 unit (180 minutes) of Stand-Alone ENL plus 1 unit (180 minutes) of Integrated ENL. Students at the Transitioning level receive 1 unit (180 minutes) per week: .5 unit of Stand-Alone ENL plus .5 unit of Stand-Alone OR Integrated ENL. Students at the Expanding level receive 1 unit (180 minutes) per week of Integrated ENL. Students athe Commanding level continue to receive .5 unit (90 minutes) per week of Integrated ENL for two years after exiting ELL status. Stand-Alone ENL instruction is provided by a certified ESOL Teacher. Integrated ENL instruction is delivered by 2 individually certified teachers (1 Common Branch/Content Area teacher + 1 certified ESOL teacher) OR by one teacher who holds both certifications. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content-area instruction in Literacy, Math, Science and Social Studies is delivered in English, with ENL and native language support provided as necessary. Our school library includes Spanish language and bilingual books. Administration has purchased Spanish-language editions of textbooks for each content area, and additional native language materials have been purchased for each classroom. In addition, teachers who are fluent in Spanish and English are able to provide native language support across the content areas in the general classroom. Many of our classroom teachers have ESOL or bilingual extensions, allowing them to bring additional expertise to our students’ learning experiences. The majority of our paraprofessionals are 3  also bilingual. ENL teachers work closely with the general classroom teachers within and across grade levels and content areas to plan curriculum and to tailor instruction to meet the needs of the ELLs in each class. Teachers use a variety of instructional approaches such as direct and guided instruction, cooperative learning and thematic units of study. The content areas are reinforced through close reading, shared reading, guided reading and independent reading experiences using materials that relate to specific units of study. While ELLs are expected to master the same academic content, concepts and skills as their English-proficient peers, this content may be delivered using different methods and instructional scaffolds such as schema-building, pictorial support, direct modeling, vocabulary previewing and reinforcement, graphic organizers, and small-group, targeted instruction. Students are also given opportunities to verbalize their learning in paired, small-group and whole-group settings, so that listening, speaking, reading and writing are integrated across the content areas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All newly admitted ELLs whose home language is Spanish are given the Spanish LAB, the results of which are immediately evaluated to determine the student’s level of proficiency in the native language. Because we use an ENL model, classroom assessments are conducated in English with home language support provided as appropriate. Many of the general classroom teachers whose classes include ELLs are fluent in Spanish, allowing them to clarify content as needed, and to conduct informal, ongoing assessments in the students’ native language. Content area curricula are available in Spanish, and New York State assessments are delivered in students’ native languages when appropriate. A bilingual Guidance Counselor and bilingual IEP Team ensure that special education evaluations are conducted in the student’s dominant language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE: We do not have any SIFE students at this time. If we admit any SIFE students who test as Entering or Emerging, they will receive 360 minutes of ELL support: 180 minutes of integrated ENL in the general classroom, plus180 minutes of stand-alone ENL in a small group. The development of oral language skills, and the transfer of oral language to reading and writing, will be emphasized. Instructional scaffolds from the ReadyGEN literacy curriculum and Go Math! will be used to support students' cognitive, linguistic and academic development. b. Newcomers: Newcomer ELLs receive academic and linguistic instruction targeted to their specific needs as new learners of English. To develop early language skills, newcomers who test as Entering or Emerging receive two units (360 minutes) per week of ENL instructonal time. Newcomer programs include one unit (180 minutes) of integrated ENL in the general classroom, in addition to one unit (180 minutes) of targeted, stand-alone ENL in a small group setting. Students who test as Entering are served in small groups in order to receive ample opportunities to practice the oral language skills that lay the groundwork for litercy developmment. Our literacy curricula (ReadyGen in K-5; Expeditionary Learning in middle school) are augmented with instructional scaffolds such as schema-building, pictorial support, direct modeling, vocabulary previewing and reinforcement, graphic organizers, and small-group, targeted instruction with an emphasis on developing students’ oral language skills as a support for literacy. To strengthen students’ foundational literacy skills, K-2 classroom teachers are trained in Reading Reform; our K-2 ENL teacher has also received initial Reading Reform training. c. Developing: Students who test as Transitioning receive a minimum of one unit (180 minutes) per week of ENL instructional time, through a combination of at least .5 unit (90 minutes) of integrated ENL in the general classroom and up to .5 unit (90 minutes) of stand-alone ENL. Students who test as Expanding receive one unit (180 minutes) per week of integrated ENL instruction in the general classroom. These students cover the same academic content, concepts and skills as their English-4  proficient peers, with an ELL teacher providing scaffolding specific to their needs. Students receive regular small group instruction, allowing them additional opportunities for listening and speaking practice as well as scaffolded reading and writing instruction. Guided reading is emphasized by all ENL teachers, who use Reading A-Z’s ELL Enhanced Reading Solution and other materials to support guided reading instruction. Supports from ReadyGEN’s Scaffolded Strategies Handbook are also supplemented with materials from Santillana’s Intensive English, and Continental’s Finish Line for ELLs. Materials from Attanasion & Associates and Continental’s Empire State NYSESLAT provide students with exposure to the types of questions and tasks they will encounter on the NYSESLAT. d. Long-term ELLs: Our school has no long-term ELLs at this time. In the past, long-term ELLs have often been ELL-SWDs. These students receive the mandated units of ENL instruction, delivered through integrated and/or stand-alone instruction, depending upon proficiency levels. The ELL teacher works closely with both the general classroom teacher and the SETSS teacher to identify and address these students’ needs. e. Former ELLs: Students who have tested as Commanding on the NYSESLAT - or who score at the Expanding level on the NYSESLAT and also achieve a Level 3 or 4 on the NYS ELA exam - continue to receive mandated support for two years after exiting ELL status, through .5 unit of study (90 minutes) per week of Integrated ENL in the general classroom. To the extent possible, newly Commanding students are placed in the same classrooms as current ELLs so they can benefit as fully as possible from ELL methodologies provided by both the ENL teacher and the general classrom teacher. English Language Learners are provided with time and a half for all State Exams, administered in a separate setting, for two years after they exit ELL status. Former ELLs are strongly encouraged to attend our After School Academic Enrichment Program, as well as Saturday Academy, in order to receive additional support. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All students whose IEPs mandate ELL services receive the appropriate ELL program, as mandated by CR Part 154-3. In the lower grades, teachers use Reading Reform activities, read-alouds and shared readings relevant to grade-level units of study to provide access to academic content and to accelerate English language development. In the upper grades, teachers reinforce and support academic learning through scaffolds such as schema-building, pictorial support, direct modeling, graphic organizers and oral practice designed to make grade-level materials accessible while building students’ academic skills and accelerating English language development. Although materials may be simplified or scaffolded according to students' language needs, learning activities and resources are grade- and age-appropriate in order to ensure that ELLs receive the same access to academic content as their English proficient peers. ELLs and ELL-SWDs receive additional support through technology-based programs such as Reading A-Z and MyOn, which include oral read-alouds of leveled texts and ample pictorial support. Special Education teachers who work with ELL-SWDs also use Fundations to supplement the phonics work that students receive in the general classroom, as well as MaxScholar, a technology-based remedial reading program. Students’ specific areas of need are identified, and their individual progress tracked, using data from DRA, iReady assessments, NYSESLAT, State exams, and predictive and interim assessments as well as formative, summative and performance-based classroom assessments. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school’s current ELL population includes a number of ELL-SWDs who receive related services in addition to ESL. Students who require SETSS, including ELL-SWDs, are generally grouped in one classroom per grade. In order to maximize the time these students spend with their general education peers, SETSS is delivered on a push-in basis to the greatest extent possible. ELL-SWDs also receive ENL instruction through integrated and/or stand-alone ENL, as determined by their proficiency levels in 5  accordance with CR Part 154-2. ICT classes are created if there are enough students per grade to support one. Student placement is IEP-driven. All ELL-SWDs who are placed in the ICT class have this placement specified on their IEPs 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Students’ specific areas of need are identified, and their individual progress tracked, using data from the DRA, iReady tests, NYSESLAT, State exams, and predictive and interim assessments as well as formative, summative and performance-based classroom assessments across the content areas. Disaggregation of assessment data by sub-groups (ELL, SWD, ELL-SWD) allows us to identify trends and adjust our instructional program as needed. Tier I interventions include targeted, differentiated, small group instruction provided by designated AIS staff throughout the school day. Because DRA data indicates that many of our ELLs read below grade level, a major focus of Extended Day is Guided Reading across the content areas, supported by Reading A-Z, fiction and non-fiction guided reading collections, and curriculum-related, thematic book sets. In the lower grades, teachers also use Reading Reform to support the development of foundational literacy skills. Tier I students are also encouraged to attend our After School Academic Enrichment program. Students in need of Tier II interventions receive at-risk SETSS (staffing and scheduling permitting) and are closely monitored by classroom teachers, out-of-classroom teachers, guidance and administration so they can be referred for special education evaluations if warranted. Title III Programs: Title III money will be used to fund Saturday Academy, focused on developing English language proficiency, content area skills and knowledge, and test sophistication strategies. Special efforts will be made to enroll Grade 4-7 ELLs who received scores of 1 or 2 on the 2015 NYS Math and ELA exams. The Saturday Academy will begin in early December and continue through April. Title III money will also be used to establish an After School Program for at-risk ELLs in Grades 3-7. All content areas will be covered, with an emphasis on test sophistication strategies in the months leading up to the State exams. SETSS: Many of our ELLs who require intervention have IEPs which entitle them to receive SETSS in addition to their mandated periods of ESL instruction. At-risk SETSS will be provided to students without IEPs if scheduling and staffing permit. ELA: In addition to the mandated minutes of ENL, students receive targeted instruction from the classroom teacher throughout the school day in the form of guided reading and writing, reading and writing conferences, strategy lessons, word study, phonics work, and small-group, differentiated instruction. Students in need of additional intervention will receive extra support from designated support staff who are assigned to provide AIS. Students are grouped according to proficiency levels and specific areas of need. ENL materials may be incorporated during small group, push-in and pull-out instruction throughout the school day. In the lower grades, teachers also use Reading Reform strategies to support students’ development of foundational literacy skills. Math: In addition to Math support provided by the ENL teachers, students receive targeted Mathematics instruction from the classroom teacher in the form of small-group lessons, the use of math manipulatives, and the practice of test sophistication strategies. Students in need of additional intervention will receive extra support from designated support staff who are assigned to provide AIS. Students are grouped according to proficiency levels and specific areas of need. Math skills will also be addressed through our Saturday Academy and After School Program for at-risk ELLs. Science: In addition to content area support provided by the ENL teachers, students receive targeted Science instruction from the classroom teacher in the form of small-group lessons, hands-on experiments, and the practice of test sophistication strategies in preparation for the Grade 4 Science Exam. Students in need of additional intervention will receive extra support from designated support staff, including STEM teachers who are assigned to provide AIS. Students are grouped according to proficiency levels and specific areas of need. Content area learning will also be addressed through our Saturday Academy and After School Program for at-risk ELLs. 6  Social Studies: In addition to content area support provided by the ENL teachers, students receive targeted Social Studies instruction from the classroom teacher in the form of small-group lessons, cooperative learning experiences, and guided reading and writing activities that incorporate Social Studies content. Content area learning will also be addressed through our Saturday Academy and after school Academic Enrichment Program for at-risk ELLs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Data from 2015 NYSESLAT and State ELA and Math exams indicates that we need to focus more intensively on the needs of our ELL-SWDs. While a number of SWDs tested out of ELL services during the 2013-14 and 2014-15 school years, a significant number of ELL-SWDs are still struggling to achieve proficiency on the NYSESLAT as well as other State exams. We hope to improve these outcomes by fostering greater levels of collaboration between our ELL and Special Education staff through Professional Learning sessions and opportunities for collaborative planning. It is crucial that our Special Education teachers are aware of second language development issues, and that ELL teachers also have an awareness of student needs that extend from underlying learning disabilities. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. English Language Learners are offered equal access to all school programs offered to students in the general population. During the regular school day, ELLs are placed in general education classrooms, with mandated ELL support, and participate fully in cluster classes (Physical Education, Art, Rhythm & Movement, Science and Technology). ELLs also participate in After School Support sessions and our Saturday Academy program in preparation for State exams. ELLs also have equal access to our school’s K-5 and Middle School After School programs, provided by Inwood Community Services, which include homework help and recreational activities, as well as holiday and vacation programming. Students are invited to participate in all extracurricular programs through notices in homework folders, follow-up phone calls, and in-person contact with our Parent Coordinator and/or other staff, with native language translation and interpretation provided as needed. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In addition to the ELL scaffolding and support materials that are included with the general classroom curriculum (ReadyGEN and Go Math in K-5; Expeditionary Learning and CMP3 in middle school), the school will invest in materials specific to the needs of our English Language Learners. ELLs and ELL-SWDs receive additional support through technology-based programs such as Reading A-Z and MyOn, which include oral read-alouds of leveled texts and ample pictorial support. Special Education teachers who work with ELL-SWDs also use Fundations to supplement the phonics work that students receive in the general classroom, as well as MaxScholar, a technology-based remedial reading program In addition, the school has invested in materials specific to the needs of our English Language Learners such as Santillana’s Intensive English and Continental’s Finish Line for ELLs and Empire State NYSESLAT. Administration has also purchased Spanish-language editions of textbooks for each content area. Our school library includes Spanish language and bilingual books. Additional native language materials, representing home languages of all ELLs, will be purchased for each classroom. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 7  Many of our general classroom teachers are fluent in Spanish, allowing them to clarify content as needed, and to conduct informal, ongoing assessments in the students’ native language. Some content area curricula are available in Spanish, and the school will invest in additional native language materials to support students in their native languages as they are gaining proficiency in English. All of our ENL and dual licensed teachers (common branch plus bilingual extension) are fluent in Spanish so they can provide ample native language support for our ELLs. Bilingual classroom teachers, paraprofessionals and school support staff offer additional native language support throughout the school day. Additional native language materials, representing home languages of all ELLs, will be purchased for each classroom to meet the needs of students from diverse language backgrounds. Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries provide additional native language support. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Programmatic decisions have been carefully considered in relation to students’ ages, grades and proficiency levels in order to provide necessary language support while maximizing learning experiences in the regular classroom. To develop early language skills, students in the lower grades who test a the Beginner/Entering level are provided with ENL services using a combination of integrated and stand-alone ENL instruction. The ReadyGEN literacy curriculum is augmented with instructional scaffolds such as direct modeling, schema-building, pictorial support, vocabulary previewing and reinforcement, graphic organizers, and small-group, targeted instruction with an emphasis on developing students’ oral language skills as a support for literacy. To develop students’ foundational literacy skills, K-2 teachers are fully trained in Reading Reform, and ENL teachers have also received initial Reading Reform training. Many of our upper grade students are at the Advanced/Expanding level and receive integrated ENL instruction in the general classroom. ELLs cover the same academic content, concepts and skills as their English-proficient peers, with the ENL teacher providing scaffolding specific to their needs. Students receive regular small group instruction, within the classroom or in pull-out groups, allowing them additional opportunities for listening and speaking practice as well as scaffolded reading and writing instruction. Guided reading is emphasized by all ENL teachers, who use the Reading A-Z’s ELL Enhanced Reading Solution and other materials to support guided reading instruction. Upper grade students who have scored at the Entering or Emerging level on the NYSESLAT receive targeted, small-group instruction for the mandated periods per week, in addition to scaffolded instruction in the general classroom. Supports from ReadyGEN’s Scaffolded Strategies Handbook are supplemented with materials from Santillana’s Intensive English, and Continental’s Finish Line for ELLs. Materials from Attanasio & Associates and Continental’s Empire State NYSESLAT provide students with exposure to the types of questions and tasks they will encounter on the NYSESLAT. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? In addition to the ELL scaffolding and support materials that are included with the general classroom curriculum (ReadyGEN and Go Math in K-5; Expeditionary Learning and CMP3 in middle school), the school will invest in materials specific to the needs of our English Language Learners. ELLs and ELL-SWDs receive additional support through technology-based programs such as Reading A-Z and MyOn, which include oral read-alouds of leveled texts and ample pictorial support. Special Education teachers who work with ELL-SWDs also use Fundations to supplement the phonics work that students receive in the general classroom, as well as MaxScholar, a technology-based remedial reading program In addition, the school has invested in materials specific to the needs of our English Language Learners such as Santillana’s Intensive English and Continental’s Finish Line for ELLs and Empire State NYSESLAT. Administration has also purchased Spanish-language editions of textbooks for each content area. Our school library includes Spanish language and bilingual books. Additional native language materials, representing home languages of all ELLs, will be purchased for each classroom. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). N/A 8  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We introduced a Spanish Language and Culture elective in Grade 7 during the 2015-16 school year. During the 2016-2017 school year, the first year in which we will have students in Grade 8, we will build upon this elective by offering more advanced Spanish language instruction in a formal academic class. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our school does not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The school will offer ENL teachers, as well as general education and dual licensed teachers whose classes include ELLs, a range of professional learning opportunities related to the needs of English Language Learners across the content areas. Our ENL teachers will attend various workshops through the NYCDOE Office of English Language Learners and other organizations, including: October 8, 2015: Performance Assessments for ELLs (Fordham University) January 22, 2016: Close Reading for ELLs - Elementary School (Fordham University) February 23, 2016: Close Reading for ELLs - Middle and High School (Fordham University) ELL and Special Education teachers will also attend a series of Fordham University workshops entitled English Language Learners with Special Needs: What You Need to Know, on the following dates: December 8, 2015: Differentiated Instruction: Using the Bilingual Common Core Language Progressions and NYSESLAT Data January 15, 2016: What Is Different about an IEP for an English Language Learner? March 8, 2016: Discovering Root Causes of Academic and Behavior Challenges for ELLs Workship content will be turn-keyed to all staff via Professional Learning sessions and Professional Planning Team meetings. In addition, we have hired a consultant from Fordham University who will offer professional learning experiences to all classroom teachers, ELL teachers, Special Education teachers, content area specialists, cluster teachers, related service providers and paraprofessionals, with a focus on planning effective instruction for children from diverse linguistic and cultural backgrounds and students with special needs. Support staff (School Secretary, Parent Coordinator) will receive training in the ELL Identification Process, ATS Data Input and Analysis, and Mandated Translation and Interpretation Services. In addition, all staff will review the Language Allocation Policy to ensure that it is effectively implemented on a schoolwide basis. Workshop attendance will be monitored and logged to ensure completion of the mandated hours of ELL training for all staff members. All schoolwide Professional Learning sessions, Professional Planning Team sessions and other profressional development opportunities are aligned to the Common Core. ELL-related professional learning experiences (see #1 above) are CCLS-aligned 9  and will provide further support to our ENL teachers as well as all other teachers who work with ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In order to support ELLs transitioning from elementary to middle school, the school provides various support systems for parents, students and school staff. Our school leadership (Principal, Assistant Principal) and Guidance Counselor support the Parent Coordinator and Grade 5 teachers by turnkeying relevant information, highlighting new procedures and processes, and providing time to meet as a team to plan for the Middle School application period. Our Guidance Counselor attends all Professional Development trainings that relate to middle school application and transition. Middle school orientation sessions are provided for fifth grade parents in English and Spanish. Our Assistant Principal and Guidance Counselor monitor and support the middle school selection process, arranging time to meet individually with students and families to provide translation services, to offer guidance in selecting appropriate schools to meet individual student needs, and to support families in completing their middle school applications. As part of WHA’s Middle School expansion, we have created a Leadership Advisory and Community Service program that emphasizes the development of leadership skills to support students’ success in high school, college and career. Professional Development (PD) for all staff will be provided by in-house ENL staff and/or outside consultants throughout the school year. Professional development opportunities will include the following topics: September: Getting Acquainted with the CCLS-aligned NYSESLAT: Interpreting 2015 Results and Planning for the Upcoming School Year October: Understanding Second Language Acquisition December: Building Oral Language as a Support for Literacy Development February: Differentiating for ELL Instruction Across the Content Areas (Focus: Math/Science) March: Using Cognates as a Support for Vocabulary, Fluency and Comprehension April: Analyzing ELL Writing Across Content Areas (Focus: ELA/Social Studies) May: Embedding Effective Scaffolds for ELLs in Content-Area Curriculum Maps Support staff (School Secretary, Parent Coordinator) will receive training in the ELL Identification Process, ATS Data Input and Analysis, and Mandated Translation and Interpretation Services. In addition, all staff will review the Language Allocation Policy to ensure that it is effectively implemented on a schoolwide basis. Workshop attendance will be monitored and logged to ensure completion of the mandated hours of ELL training for all staff members. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to initial parent orientations, parent-teacher conferences or other meetings, ENL teachers will meet individually with the parents or guardians of English Language Learners at least once a year. At these meetings, the ENL teacher will discuss the goals of the program, the child’s language development progress, the child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. These meetings will be conducted in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands, with the support of a qualified interpreter/translator if needed. Parents or guardians will be invited to attend these meetings during the Tuesday afternoon Parent Outreach period that is part of the current New York City Department of Education teachers’ contract. 0  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. A major emphasis of our school is to involve parents of all students, including English Language Learners, in their children’s education, and to provide support services for parents and guardians. Our work with families involves our Parent Coordinator, who conducts outreach to engage parents in meetings and workshops, as well as our PTA Executive Board members (most of whom are bilingual), who seek to include parents of ELLs in schoolwide events and activities, including Open School Nights, Parent-Teacher Conferences, Curriculum Nights and other school events. Spanish translation services are available at all school events, as provided by the Principal, Assistant Principal and Parent Coordinator (who are all Spanish-English speakers); by bilingual teachers and paraprofessionals; and by bilingual members of the PTA Executive Board and/or school support staff. All school notices are posted and sent home in both English and Spanish, and Spanish-speaking staff often make follow-up calls to parents reminding them about important school events. Interpretation for parents who speak a language other than Spanish is often provided by family friends and/or relatives. If such support is not available, school staff may contact the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation and interpretation services. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Renzo Martinez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Washington Heights Academy School DBN: 06M366 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Renzo Martinez Title Principal Mercedes Diaz Assistant Principal Alexandra Ulloa Parent Coordinator Maria Reynoso, ENL ENL/Bilingual Teacher Marilandia Barrientos Parent Sorangel Solpiaget, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Cynthia Rivera, Grade 4 Teache Lynne Doherty Herndon Nicole Bonheur Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Antoinette Ansalone School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 06M366 School Name: Washington Heights Academy Superintendent: Manuel Ramirez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When parents fill out a Home Language Information Survey (HLIS) as part of the registration process, they are asked which language they prefer for oral and written communications from the school. This information is recorded at the bottom of the HLIS (Part III). After administration of the HLIS, each student receives a Home Language code on ATS. This data can be accessed through various ATS reports (e.g., RHLA, RPOB, RADP). Information about language preferences can also be obtained from the Emergency Contact Cards, which are updated at the start of each school year. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 4 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The vast majority of parents who indicate a need for translation and interpretation are Spanish speaking. We have a few families who require Arabic and Bengali translation; these families generally provide their own oral interpreters (adult relatives or community members) when needed. While our school community includes speakers of other languages, including Albanian, Russian, Ukrianian, these parents are fluent in English and do not require written translation or oral interpretation. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Spanish translations are consistently provided for all written communications from the school, including the Family Handbook, newsletters, calendars, parent-teacher conference announcements, report cards, out-of-school-time program information, New York State testing information, letters from school 5  leadership, meeting and workshop announcements, flyers about special events, PTA documents and more. For families who speak a home language other than English or Spanish, we use native language translations from the DOE website for the DOE school calendar and announcements of other important school events (e.g., Open School Night, Parent-Teacher Conferences). Multi-lingual native language translations are provided for all correspondence pertaining to ELL services (e.g., new non-entitlement letters, new entitlement letters, parent survey and program selection forms, placement letters, continuing entitlement letters, transitional support letters). 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We hold a number of face-to-face meetings with parents throughout the year, including Open School Night, parent-teacher conferences, IEP meetings, curriculum nights, moving-up ceremonies and other schoolwide events. Informal interacations include in-person contact and phone communications with administration, guidance counselor, parent coordinator, teachers or other school staff. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 6  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The multilingual Welcome Poster will be displayed prominently at the front door of the school, at the security desk, and outside the main office. The Parents' Bill of Rights and Parents' Guide to Language Access will be disseminated to all parents, with relevant native language translations provided. In addition, the Language Identification Guide and Language Identification and Interpretation Palm Card will be available at the security desk and in the main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will use an annual parent survey to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services at our school. 7 
