 06M368 School Name: HAMILTON HEIGHTS SCHOOL Principal: CHARLES REILLY   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Hamilton Heights School 06M368 0000 K-5 School Number (DBN): 1750 Amsterdam Avenue, New York, NY, 10031 212-862-9940 Phone Number: 212-862-9946 Fax: Charles Reilly creilly3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Email Address: Charles Reilly Tamara Bynum Erin Ratner/Alyssa Guitierrez-Soogrim Parents’ Association President: NaimaBeckles SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): TBD CBO Representative: GretchenPfeil District Information Geographical District: 6 Mr. Manuel Ramirez Superintendent: 4360 Broadway, Room 527, New York, NY, 10033 Superintendent’s Office Address: Mramire4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 917-521-3757 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Ms. Yuet Chu Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7 th Avenue ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (212) 356-7564 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Mr. CharlesReilly Ms. Tamara Bynum Ms. Erin Ratner/Alyssa GutierrezSoogrim Ms. AudreyMitchell Alyssa Gutierrez-Soogrim Ms. NaimaBeckles Ms. CarmenKeels Ms. DrewRabidoux Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Parent Parent Parent   Name Ms. MarinievesAlba Ms. AmyCorsun Ms. WileydiPeguero Ms. GretchenPfeil Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Parent Parent Member/Teacher Co-Chair/Teacher Co-Chair/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/CBORepresentative Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Hamilton Heights School was founded as a program by parents who valued a progressive education for their children. To this end, the school community values an holistic approach to education which supports students in the core academic areas, values project-based learning, and includes a robust arts program as part of the school day. Mission Statement:   "To provide an academically rigorous education to a diverse population of students in an atmosphere that is nurturing, supportive, and respectful. We seek to develop social awareness among our students and to expose them to broader issues of our surrounding communities. Our students are encouraged to share their knowledge, to question and probe ideas, and to use evidence and acquired information to support their opinions. Our progressive educational philosophy values hands on learning and focuses on meeting children’s individual learning styles. We do not believe that “one size fits all” and tailor instruction to the developmental needs of our children." 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Hamilton Heights School has developed many successful partnerships over the years. The Boys and Girls Club of Harlem provides homework help, athletics, drama, and art. Arts for All (K-2)  integrates fine arts into the literacy curriculum. Second graders participate in swimming lessons once a week at Asphalt Green. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The student body includes 16.67% English language learners and 19.33% of students with disabilities. The results of data analysis of the ENL population shows that writing is an area of need. The NYSESLAT data in particular shows that ENL students do not score proficient in the writing sessions. Alongside ENL students, a specific need for students with disabilities is that students' writing pieces lack focus, organization, and basic writing conventions as evidenced by student writing portfolios. Reading and writing lessons lack differentiation to meet the needs of students with disabilities based on the 2016-2017 Quality Review Report and/or teacher feedback from Advance observations. After careful review of all data, we are embarking on a year long plan to focus on writing skill development for both ENL students and students with disabilities which consists of:  Professional learning and feedback to teachers is currently prioritizing pedagogical practices that provide scaffolds to meet the needs of all learners, particularly ENL students and students with disabilities, and use process-embedded supports to develop students' writing skills. Specialists (related service providers, ENL teacher, and Intervention teachers) will meet monthly during Monday Professional Learning time to analyze data and adjust instructional plans.   Aligning lessons to the writing progressions and rubrics, allows teachers and student to self evaluate. Writing is expected to occur in all subjects, not just during English Language Arts. The rubrics allow teachers and students to see where they are and what fields they need to improve in order to make academic gains.  A Saturday program that targets academic vocabulary across all content and that allows students ample of writing opportunities will be held to supplement the student’s needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 0  Hamilton Heights School made the most progress over the past year in the following elements of the Framework for Great Schools: Effective School Leadership, Supportive Environment, and Student Achievement. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 100% of teachers say that the principal participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers (Q11h), carefully tracks student academic progress (Q11f), and communicates a clear vision for this school. (Q11b) Our key areas of focus for this school year are curriculum, instruction, and learning materials: According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, only 82% of teachers say that curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are well coordinated across different grade levels at their school. (Q8g) This is a priority need. Curricula and academic tasks are currently being monitored and revised using student work and data so that individual and groups of students, including the lowest- and highest- achieving students, ENLs, and SWDs, have access to the curricula and tasks and are cognitively engaging. Professional learning and feedback to teachers is currently prioritizing pedagogical practices that provide scaffolds to meet the needs of all learners, particularly ENL students and students with disabilities, and use process-embedded supports to develop students' writing skills. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M368 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 171 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 18 8 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 70.0% % Attendance Rate 65.5% % Reduced Lunch 16.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.8% 53.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 16.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.23 0% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 22.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 88% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 4 4 93.4% 4.7% 17.0% 19.9% 4.1% 6.4% 0 12% 4.8 26.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school showed growth in grades K-2 on the NYC Performance Task in ELA, and in grades 3-5 on the NYC Performance Task in Math throughout the 2017-2018 school year. We will continue to provide support to our whole student population by enhancing students’ writing skills through explicit vocabulary instruction and evidence based non-fiction writing. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, in grades K-5 all students will complete three published writing pieces as evidenced by the work in their ELA portfolios. The rubric based writing pieces will assess the following writing elements: focus, organization, development, language, vocabulary, and conventions. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Monthly, Principal, PD team Teachers will use the TCWRP to support students’ writing in the following areas: September 2018-June 2019 Seed ideas and graphic organizers,   drafting process,   published pieces. rewriting and editing process, and Throughout the process teachers will confer with students and provide actionable feedback. All teachers Monthly, Principal Teachers will develop a series of lessons around drafting, editing, citing text, and implementing transition words. September 2018-June 2019 1. Create a schedule for working with small groups 2. Design authentic reading and writing materials and activities for groups working independently. Specialists (related service providers, ENL teacher, and Intervention teachers) will meet weekly in grade teams to analyze data and adjust instructional plans. K-2 and Weekly, 3-5 general education teachers, special educators, ENL teacher September 2018-June 2019 Principal and staff 4  Saturday program will be held for ENLs and other students falling in lowest third in grades K-4 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal, identified teachers, and ENL teacher November 2018-June 2019 Principal, ENL teachers; identified teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families are invited to come to see their child's teacher every Tuesday afternoon from 2:40-3:20.  All classroom teachers at HHS will continue to provide at-home strategies to meet the common core learning standards. Students will use technology to research and edit their writing pieces at home.   Parents will be invited to publishing parties, which will be held intermittently to showcase students' writing pieces. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. All teachers support writing through academic intervention services on designated periods during the school day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The principal and grade teams (K-2 and 3-5) will look at written portfolio pieces during the school wide publishing events 5 times per year. In addition, the principal will meet with teachers during common planning teams to review the student writing process monthly. By February 2019, all K-5 students will have three published writing pieces in their portfolio. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) By Februaury 2019, all students in K-5 will have at least two published pieces of writing in their ELA portfolios. The specific instruments of measure that are used to assess progress are the rubrics for portfolio pieces and ELA performance tasks. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 96% of teachers say that adults at their school help students develop the skills they need to complete challenging coursework despite obstacles. (Q21a)More specifically, 100% of teachers say that adults at their school tell their students they believe they can achieve high academic standards. (Q21b) and, 100% of teachers say that adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities. (Q21f) Although the data reveals that we are proficient in this framework element there is room for growth. Only 82% of our teachers say that adults at their school have access to school-based supports to assist in behavioral and emotional escalations. (Q21h) The policies in place to ensure we are supporting the whole child are morning meetings, guidance groups, sports activities, closing circles, and Maker’s Space. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of all teachers will receive at least two trainings on the school wide supports to assist in behavioral and emotional escalations. This includes, trainings on behavioral supports conducted by the guidance counselor, the school social worker, and administration. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will receive training on improving social interactions. All staff and students September 2018-June 2019 Guidance Counselor and School Social Worker. Teachers will integrate community building practices into daily routines, as observed by administrative staff. Teachers and Students. Once a month, Oct. 2018-May, 2019. Administration Teachers will engage in culturally responsive education to integrate structures and systems to support all students academically and socially. (Integration of Cultures into curriculum and events, intervention protocol and de-escalation techniques) Teachers, Paraprofessionals, September 2018-June 2019 and students. Administration, Guidance Counselor All Students Students will receive at least three units of health education using HealthSmart curriculum. September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Physical Education Teacher, School Wellness Committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The teachers at Hamilton Heights School will continue to engage parents/families during Tuesday Parent Engagement time from 2:40 to 3:20 p.m. The principal will hold monthly meetings and send newsletters, which will be translated to reach the diverse population at our school. An online communication system has been implemented to support parent-teacher communication in regard to educating the whole child. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 7  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will receive training on restorative practice, de-escalation techniques, and Maker's Space. In addition, the master schedule will include a specific time allocation for implementation. The physical education teacher will implement the Health Smart curriculum focusing on social and emotional health. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The physical education teacher will use HealthSmart curriculum to promote emotional and mental self care. By February 2019, 50% of all students will have received three units of Health Education. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The school will use the Health Smart/Health Teacher assessment to measure student progress and achievement. In addition, attendance of all teacher trainings will be taken as evidenced by sign-in sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2016-2017 Quality Review Report and the 2017-2018 PPO report, school leaders and faculty will continue to ensure that curricula are aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and content standards, and integrate the instructional shifts. Curriculum and academic tasks will be planned and refined using student work and data. Purposeful curricula decisions will build coherence and promote college and career readiness for all students so that a diversity of learners, including our English Language Learners and students with disabilities, are cognitively engaged in rigorous tasks across grades and subjects (1.1) To continue to improve the implementation of Common Core aligned instruction across the grades, curriculum maps, assessments, and instructional resources (Specifically Teachers College Readers and Writing Project Units ) and tiered instruction will be implemented within and across grade bands to ensure cohesive instruction. To reach our English Language Learners and students with disabilities, researched based strategies and creative teacher initiatives will be shared and presented to others during professional development sessions, inter-visitations, and common planning periods across all grade bands on a monthly basis. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all K-5 students will produce at least 4 writing portfolio pieces, with a rubric, multiple drafts, and feedback showing student growth over time, aligned to grade specific writing expectations. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? MFSC and identified teachers will provide professional development in the area of assessment with a focus on creating writing tasks and rubrics aligned to common core standards in units of study. Teachers will participate in cycles of professional learning to build their toolkit of pedagogical strategies in the following areas: All teachers August 2018-June 2019 Principal, teacher leaders All teachers August Principal, all staff 2018-June 2019 Learning Targets   Checking for Understanding in daily lessons  Using data with students  Models, critique, and descriptive feedback  Developing and using student growth portfolios Integration of practices across all content areas: Teachers College Units; Go Math!; Social Studies; Amplify Science; Dance; Music; Student Services (special education and ENL support) Teachers and students will select student work samples, drafts with rubrics and feedback, and student reflection sheets to discuss at each Parent Teacher Conference. All teachers August Principal, all staff 2018-June 2019 All teachers Each PTC Principal, all staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be offered monthly workshops to be held in September and ending in June. The workshops will cover topics such as Literacy, Math and behavior support. Specifically, providing a series of workshops that promotes reading strategies that parents can use as they read with their children at home, and a workshop on how to utilize the online Go Math! school home connection. In addition, we have family engagement time where families are invited to come and see their child's teacher every Tuesday afternoon from 2:40-3:20. The Principal Assigned, will coordinate, along with the necessary stakeholders, all parent workshops in the Fall, Winter, and Spring. 0  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will leverage our school budget money for training in aligned strategies, PL and coaching support from MFSC, observation and feedback to teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100 % of our student population will have portfolios showing evidence of at least 2 tasks with multiple opportunities to receive feedback and revise their work. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Staff will assess rigor and quality of student work against CCLS exemplars and writing rubrics in order to norm alignment to the standard. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, only 82% of teachers say that curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are well coordinated across different grade levels at their school. (Q8g) This is a priority need. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 17 out of 33 (52%) third grade students will pass the End Of Year GoMath! test with a score of 70% or better. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? GoMath! professional development trainer will provide professional development focused on: Third grade teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, identified staff lesson structure and design; small group differentiated instruction and;    PMT overview. Grade teams will analyze student work with specific protocols to assess the impact of teaching practices, and target instruction for specific groups of students. Third grade teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, identified team leader The data analysis will result in: Saturday Academy, AIS groupings, and after-school enrichment. Teams will document meetings by maintaining agendas and next steps to differentiated instruction in Google Drive. Third grade teachers Principal, All staff September 2018-June 2019 N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will utilize the parent coordinator to conduct outreach with the parents to share information relating to joining the SLT and the Parent Association. Through this mechanism the parents will learn about what each team does and how their voices contribute to the school community. In addition, the Parent Coordinator will conduct bi-monthly workshops on The GoMath! Home-School Connection and how parents can support their children at home. The Parent Coordinator will enlist some teachers to support in the workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 3  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will leverage school budget money per session, substitute class coverage for trainings and inter-visitations to set up effective teams and processes. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 26% of the 33 third grade students will pass the mid-year GoMath! assessment with a score of 70% or better. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The specific instruments of measure will be the GoMath! beginning, mid-year, and end of year assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Anecdotal evidence collected by parent leaders points to a need to improve communication around instructional goals, curricula, expectations, schedules, and day-to-day school operation. While some classes have systems and procedures in place for some of these areas, we seem to lack consistency across the board that would result in every parent and family to be informed and engaged in their children's learning. Our school was founded on a culture of parent participation, engagement and leadership. This continues to this day, with parents who are highly involved in many ways, such as volunteering, helping teachers and supporting school staff. This plays a fundamental role in incoming families' choice of the school: they are attracted by this small, engaged “community of learners” where families play a central role. What needs to be addressed is a way to channel this positive family energy into more constructive ways to improve school environment, instruction and learning. Our goal for the year is to improve family engagement in their children's learning and instruction. Our first step will be to improve the families' confidence and knowledge about the curriculum and associated learning strategies and expectations. Also, families will be informed about tools to help them support their children's learning at home, and to address a better overall school environment with a specific focus on behavior and discipline. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parent attendance of all family workshops aligned to literacy, math, and behavior support will increase by 5% which is 15 parents to 23 parents as evidenced by workshop materials, attendance sign-in sheets, and feedback forms to parents. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Families will be offered monthly workshops to be held starting in December and ending in June 2019. The topics of the workshops will include Literacy, Math and Behavior Support. For each topic we will offer two workshops in order to measure effectiveness and impact, so that if needed a different strategy can be implemented. All families Family Engagement Time All families Families are invited to come to see their child’s teacher every Tuesday afternoon from 2:40-3:20 SLT, PL team, and PA Executive Board SLT, PL Team and PA Executive Board December 10, 2018 – June 10, 2019 December 10, 2018 – June 10, 2019  HHS will continue to provide at-home strategies to meet the common core learning standards  Teachers will provide parents with individual reading and math goals for students  Administration team, staff, and families will use technology to optimize the sharing of ideas and send home a weekly notices with school updates, such as field trips and/or local community events.  Administration will hold parent engagement sessions, such as Coffee with the principal to hear the voices of families. These sessions will be communicated to parents in a timely manner as to date and time. A school newsletter will include principal, PA, and classroom updates; this will be backpacked home and posted on the school website. All families December 2018-June 2019 Principal, PA, and teacher leaders Families of students with disabilities or for whom English is a New Language will participate in at least 2 workshops in which the needs of their children are addressed with specific strategies to assist outside of school. Families of ENL students and SWDs December 2018-June 2019 Principal, PA, and teacher leaders with expertise in ENL and SWD 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 6  Community Based Organizations such as after school CHAMPS, Track at the Armory, Scribble Arts, and Boys and Girls Club will support our school community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Activities will take place before and after school hours so they will require building permits to open the school building, but no schedule adjustment. Per session will be needed for teachers who are supporting this work. In terms of human resources it will require content experts to offer the workshops and child-care during the workshops. The newsletter will require per-session for teachers and secretary for writing and publishing. The website will require funding for an upgraded ".com" site and consultant to develop links and pages. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019, there will be evidence of the following: at least 2 Family Workshops, one in each area (Literacy and Math) as evidenced by attendance sheets and parent feedback surveys. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The specific instruments of measure are workshop materials, attendance records, and feedback forms from parents. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) F and P running reading records – lowest third; analysis of CC aligned unit tasks (Level 1); lowest third of students on NYS assessment analysis of CC aligned unit tasks (Level 1); lowest third of students on NYS assessment Teacher observations, unit tests Teacher observations, unit tests Students in need of Tier 2 and Tier 3 interventions as determined by data collection on behavior incidents and interventions used in Tier 1 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Strategy lessons based on miscueanalysis of running reading records; Fundations for students struggling with phonics and phonemic awareness Use of common core aligned fluency lessons, targeting identified area of skill development Differentiated materials, project based learning Differentiated materials, project based learning Behavior contracts; Check-in Check out behavior support strategy; small group interventions for issues including bullying and anger management Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group and tutoring During the school day Small group and tutoring During the school day Small groups Small groups During the school day During the school day Small group and individual counseling During the school day 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 1 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The services we plan to provide to the STH population are at-risk counseling; weekly attendance monitoring and home visits as needed by attendance teacher and; family outreach and coordination of wrap around services for additional support. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our school has a Hiring Committee which includes teachers who either volunteer or are chosen by peers, and parents from the SLT. As a staffing need arises, postings are generated and approved, and/or a position is created in Galaxy and posted on the Teacher Finder site. Applicants’ information is downloaded from the DHR site. The principal interviews them to assess if the applicants are Highly Qualified, add value to the school community, show commitment to meeting the needs of diverse students, believes all students can achieve, and have a commitment to life-long learning. The Hiring Committee is convened for additional interviews and demonstration lessons in order to gather information of pedagogical skill set and alignment to the progressive mission of the school. To support new teachers, teachers on the SLT as well as teacher leaders work with the school principal to identify areas for growth and assist to enlist as mentors (for first year teachers) and plan for supportive PD accordingly. All teachers set goals for individual professional learning with the principal, and participate in identified workshops and inter-visitations with other schools/classrooms with aligned values and pedagogy throughout the school year. Teachers reflect on professional learning and feedback from the principal in order to revise the school-wide and individual professional plans in alignment with quarterly check-ins to review student achievement data. Teacher leaders drive PL cycles within teams (K-1, 2-3, and 4-5) together with specialists (e.g. ENL/SETSS/ICT teachers to support differentiation and scaffolds for those students). In addition, at strategic points in the year, teachers who have attended professional development workshops share their learning by turn-keying information to colleagues. Teacher assignments are determined each year based on teacher preferences and review of teacher strengths as documented via Advance, and student data in order to support our unique cohorts of students most effectively year to year. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Direct support, including job embedded coaching and time in the master schedule and after school to: 1) Use NYC curricular scope and sequence as well as pacing maps for ELA (TC Reading and Writing), Math (Engage NY). and Science and Social Studies (provided by NYCDOE Office of Teaching and Learning), and application of backward-1  design principles (derived from Understanding by Design) to design units and lessons that encourage inquiry-based learning and enables embedded, performance-based assessments. 2) Use of and adaptations to Common Core aligned curricular units, lessons and resources, (Teacher’s College Reading and Writing and Fundations for ELA; Go Math!). 3) Design and/or adaptation of performance tasks that integrate the shifts of the CCLS 4) Provision of updated instructional materials, including Math modules, math manipulatives, non-fiction texts, and Common Core-aligned Fundations kits.. 5) Ongoing weekly professional development for all staff include iterative cycles to create curricula-embedded assessments to enable assessment for learning. These are supported in PD cycles that are planned, led, and supported by the principal and staff occur and as job-embedded PD (modeling teaching, debriefing, collaborative planning and looking at student work) as well as additional PD time after school to learn about new pedagogical practices to support students with diverse learning needs. This includes paraprofessionals. 6) Professional development and feedback on the collection and analysis of student work to improve professional understanding among staff of the skills required of the common core shifts in student work, and next steps for teaching and learning. 7) Ongoing weekly professional development on 8) Professional development on strategies for supporting students with challenging behaviors, via the Guidance Counselor; this includes paraprofessionals Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 2  We currently do not have a Pre-K program. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher teams, the Professional Learning Committee, and staff selected F&P running records, performance tasks in ELA and Math, and development of student growth portfolios; the school-based Professional Learning Plan has been developed to align with this and includes lesson studies, book clubs, analysis of student work, monitoring and revision of the curriculum, and inter-visitations to align to this instructional priority. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5 5 5 5 x x x x x Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 86,936.00 16,542.00 11,200.00 0 1,062,403.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 3  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Template Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Hamilton Heights School (06M368), in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 5  Hamilton Heights School (06M368) , will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 6  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Hamilton Heights School (06M368) , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 7  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. School Responsibilities: Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 8  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 9  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 06 School Name HAMILTON HEIGHTS SCHOOL Borough Manhattan School Number 368 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Deirdre Budd Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Wileydi Peguero Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Jessica Gatas Superintendent Manuel Ramirez Assistant Principal type here Coach type here School Counselor Hanin Awaad Parent type here Parent Coordinator Sylvia Gonzalez Field Support Center Staff Member Sileni Nasario Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 220 1 Total number of ELLs 43 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 19.55%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 Lang. na na na na na na Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Each classroom teacher has a Fountas & Pinnell Benchmarks assessment kit, which it is isused to do individual assessments once every six weeks. Students in beginning kg. are assessed for readiness, letter recognition and letter sound correspondence in English. As students begin to read, they are placed into groups for guided reading according to the F & P letter system, which is normed to determine which levels students should be reading at in the beginning, middle and end of each grade. These periodic running records serve to inform instruction as well as to identify classwide patterns- useful in adjusting instruction to bolster a particular set of skills or area of literacy. In addition, each grade uses rubrics, checklists and self-evaluations before, during and at the end of each reading and writing unit. The ENL teacher assesses all K-1 students periodically throughout the year using the F&P high frequency words as well as the leveled Dolch sight words. These then forms part of every student's portfolio. All of this informs differentiation of instruction in class and with the ENL teacher. Our SETTS teacher is trained in Wilson Fundations for phonological/phonemic awareness. 2  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? During the integrated ENL service period, the ENL and Content area teachers target different student population. The groups are formed based on the data collected and reviewed periodically and studied during common prep periods. Groups tend to vary throughout the academic year as reflected by the data. The ENL teacher focuses on implementing various methodologies to help those in the entering and emerging level of all classes by scaffolding lessons to meet their needs utilizing the new language progressions. Teachers collaborate to ensure that all ENL students regardless of language proficiency level are meeting the standards. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Firstly, we had 3/4 of our current ELLs improve over their previous year's NYSESLAT level, demonstrating success of the program as measured on that key assessment data. As the reality is that our school has had opt-out rates of roughly 50% over the last 2 years, we do not restrict our evaluations of upper grade students to merely the NYS exam results. Portfolio development by classroom teachers inevitably includes work that was done in collaboration with the ENL teacher in the case of ELLS, including scaffoldings and more targeted graphic organizers that are informed by ENL best practices, that scaffold the word and provide academic vocabulary within the CCLS and classroom content. This year, needs for improving instructional support for ELLs and SWDs have been identified as a top priority by all stakeholders in our school. Integrating ENL services and utilizing the new language progressions to align our curriculum, lessons and activities allows for identifying and adjusting the needs for all level students. Modifications of, and evaluation of our ENL programs, are ongoing, most importantly through a look at student work and assessment data throughout the year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Common planning preps where teachers can plan together, review data and align curriculum and lesson plans for immediate instructional shifts as well as for future planning. ENL after school programs target student population with high number of students struggling. For example, a large number of students in the 1st and 2nd grade were struggling meeting their reading levels and an after-school word study program was created to strategically assist those students. The ENL teacher implemented Fundations program for half of the class and the other half of the class was utilized to teach non-fiction, curriculum aligned materials to ensure understanding and assist with the acquisition of new vocabulary. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We have a variety of targeted intervention programs for our ELLs in ELA, Math and the other content areas. All our intervention programs are offered in English. Many of our ELL students attend our extended day program. In this intervention, a large amount of the instruction targets literacy and content area reading and writing . There may be individual reading conferences, as well as small group strategy instruction. Another intervention that is used in both the lower and upper grades are the Fundations and Wilson comprehensive language arts programs. There are groups working on math intervention, such as building math vocabulary through the use of personal/bilingual glossaries and the use of manipulatives. Throughout the day, teachers also meet with small groups of ELLs to develop specialized math reading strategies. In addition we provide intervention services to our ELLs through our SETSS teacher. Our SETSS teacher uses a range of materials to meet the needs of their students, such as modified texts, multimedia resources, graphic organizers and charts with visuals. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns across NYSESLAT modalities indicate that our students attain commanding and expanding levels in the Listening/Speaking as early as second grade but do not make the same rate of progress in the Reading/Writing combined modalities. While this is consistent with all the research on the academic development of ELLs (BICS vs. CALP), the ENL Team, in conjunction with the rest of the faculty, have identified this as an area of priority to implement action-research cycles, in order to better address ELL needs specifically in the area of writing. Data from the most recent NYSESLAT and ELA exams 3  reveal that our students are weakest in writing, followed by reading. More deeper analysis of MSV analysis from the ongoing F&P running records will better ascertain specfic skills gaps . Our 2016 NYSESLAT data reveals the following: Kindergarteners---on the Listening modality, 5/8 scored proficient and the other 3 were 1 point from proficient demonstrating near total proficiency in Listening; on Speaking, all but 1 scored proficient; unlike Speaking and Listening with all students at or very close to proficiency, no K scored proficient on Writing; 3 were proficient on Reading, and another was a point from proficient. This data demonstrates a need for greater focus on reading and, especially, writing for these current first-graders. 1 st -graders: on Listening modality 3/7 scored proficient, 2 were 2 points from proficient; on Speaking all but 1 were proficient, and that 1 was only 1 point from proficient (and came to school later in the academic year); on Reading no child scored proficient, though 2 were close to proficient; on Writing 2 scored proficient and 2 were 1 point from proficiency. This data is similar to K data showing much higher proficiency in Listening and Speaking, but shows that 1 st -graders were weaker in Reading than Writing, whereas the Ks were weaker in Writing than Reading. Clearly, this demonstrates a need for further work on Reading with the current second-graders (as well those who will be into first); in short, more focus on reading and writing skills. F & P running records done in September reveal that, of ELLs at this grade: 4 are 3 grade levels below; 1, 3 levels; 2, 2 levels and 2, 1 level. 2 nd -graders: all but 1 scored proficient on both Listening and Speaking, and the 1 who didn't was 2 and 3 points from proficiency; on Reading and Writing all students scored proficient. This data indicates that current 3 rd -graders, while having clearly improved, are--except for 1--at the Expanding level, with 1 student being 1 point from Commanding, and the others far enough away from that to re-target work to push their proficiencies in reading and writing. F & P running records done in September reveal that all ELLs in the grade are reading at least 4 levels below grade goals. 3 rd -graders: We only have 2 ELLs in this category, current 4 th -graders, and both are Expanding now. They each scored proficient on 3 out of 4 of the modalities; one was 1 point from proficiency on Speaking and the other missed proficiency on Reading. Her reading work--a clear target of her IEP and SETTS work--is already and will continue to focus on her literacy skills. F & P running records done in September reveal that 1/2 the ELLs in this grade are reading at roughly 3 levels below grade goals and that 1 is reading as much as 7 levels below, a G, when M is the target. 4 th -graders: Our current 5 th -grade classes have 1/2 of ELLs at a Commanding level, with the other 3 each at a different level, none Entering. Our Expanding student was 6 points overall from Commanding, so a goal from this data is to push her work in all modalities towards the level of Commanding. Our lowest level ELL, who moved from Entering to Emerging on the last NYSESLAT, had a score that puts her very close to moving to Transitioning, or possibly even Expanding, over the course of this year. Again, all 4 modalities are areas of focus, in particular her reading and, especially, writing, which requires greater organization, and variety of vocabulary and ideas and content. Finally, our third non-Commanding ELL requires improvement in all modalities--though proficient in Listening--and will be receiving dual support from the ENL and SETTS teacher (she has an IEP) on these skills. For current students in 5 th grade, reading levels vary--as does the NYSESLAT data mentioned above on their 4 th -grade NYSESLAT--widely, with the 3 non-Commanding ELLs reading at J, M and O, with S being the September target. The NYSITELL scores of our entering Ks this year shows that 6/8 of our ELLs came at the lowest level of Entering, with the other two having scored already at Expanding. As is often the case, each of the 8 have strong native langauge speaking and listening skills, with 3 of our 8 scoring a 0 on the NYSITELL due to their inability to respond to any question on the test. Work this year on those 3 and all, will be focused on developing all 4 modalities, including making use of transferable native-language skills. 4  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Continuous data reviews, the data gathered from state exams as well as in-house assessments are constantly being reviewed. There are many opportunities to review and analyze data throughout the school year. Teachers meet during common planning preps and intensively review data to align lessons, curriculum and formulate student groupings. Communication is a key factor between ENL service provider, administration and school community. The ENL teacher also leads various data collection analysis sessions during professional development cycles to keep the school community informed of data collection trends and also to give ENL strategies, modifications and resources that are valuable to all teachers working with ENL or former ENL students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. As per CR Part 154.2 students in the appropriate proficiency levels receive instruction through integrated, free standing and targeted co-planning with the classroom teacher that provides indirect supports and instruction for the ELLs, for example through graphic organizers or vocabulaly and sentence frames that the ESL teacher has created for use in the classroom by the classroom teacher. Students are grouped in a variety of ways for the variety of benefits desired. Foremost is the fact that our school's block scheduling allows for a coordinated setting of the ESL teacher's schedule; it also though allows for the flexibility to move from one group to another depending on infrequent changes to scheduling. The ESL teacher has split the last two periods of the day into 4 periods to maximize more targeted work with Entering or more struggling ELLs. Students are grouped in mixed proficiency levels as well in homogeneous levels. For our Entering ELLs there is grouping across grades, though rarely more than two grades. Groupings will change depending on needs and the goals of the small-group work, as well. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our school does its best to ensure the maximum instructional minutes and following the CR-Part 154 mandates with our staffing according to proficiency levels in our Freestanding ENL Program. What has proven most helpful is the flexible scheduling and targeted grouping of ELLs being serviced; students exhibiting the need for more work in certain areas, following monitored work and assessment, will be placed into another group. These adaptations roughly occur on a 6-week basis and do not affect the majority of students. Additionally, the ESL teacher is in regular communication with the SETTS and Speech teacher, thus assuring further indirect support through other service providers, as well as obtaining their specialized insights. Explicit instructional minutes in ENL, ELA and HLA are always focused on work related to the child's current in-class units of study. As mentioned, this could be through integrated services, free standing and indirect collaboration with the other teachers of the child. As this is a Freestanding ENL Program, explicit minutes dedicated to language acquisition are integrated 5  for obvious ENL pedagogical reasons. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content instruction in all subject areas is delivered in English. The ENL teacher follows the curriculum maps and pacing calendars of grades K-5, for the most part consisting of 5-multidisciplinary units of study which are aligned to the Common Core State Standards. It also aligns all of its lessons to meet the new language progressions ensuring that all lessons are meeting the needs of its diverse population. There has been a rigorous focus this year to allign those maps with the new language progressions and CCLS and the work will be modified and adapted as the year progresses. The instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards include: 1. ELLs experience the curriculum through the a multi-sensory approach that includes: 1a. Images, realia, iPad interactive apps for learning including web sites with audio books and video/animated readings of stories, Total Physical Response, accessing prior knowledge and prior experiences, role plays, Readers Theater, writing, typing and oral videotaped presentations using the Promethean Board as a great technological tool. 2. ELLs also discuss the curriculum through an following approach that includes: 2a. Instruction that focuses on Danielson's Domain 3a - Communicating with Students. ELL students are given Can Cards for ESL instruction. Small group goals are listed on students' Can Cards. These goals are aligned to the reading strategies each group is working on in their respective ESL free- standing small group. Exit tickets provide further assessment and reiteration of goals. "Why did we do this?" provides higher order oral responses to our work as well, that too done in a setting of "Look-Lean-Listen" accountable talk. 3. Instruction that focuses on Danielson's Domain 3b - Questioning and Discussion Techniques. The ENL teacher in the ENL small groups use questioning based on the 4 levels of questioning according to the Depth of Knowledge continuum. Also, the CCSS for Speaking and Listening are aligned with protocols such as the Socratic Seminar format, and student driven discussions during the lesson and at the end of the lesson to solidfy the learning. Using each of these protocols, students drive the discussion and the teacher observes, takes notes, and facilitates or re-directs the conversation as needed. 4. Other research-based standards and ENL teaching resources that--though aligned to the CCLS--are not explicitly those include : the WIDA Academic Language standards, rich in Can-Do protocol statements; the Framework for English Language Proficiency Development Standards corresponding to the Common Core State Standards and the Next Generation Science Standards. Both these sets of ENL standards are widely researched and used throughout the US and were deeply unpacked in a 2-year-long Sole ENL Provider Study Group that met monthly with the previous Network ELL Lead, and in which our ENL teacher particpated. Two other key documents relating to current instructional methodology and engagemnet with the standards include very recent DOE documents: The Leading Advanced Literacy Instruction to Promote ELLs’ Achievement and the document published November 2015 by the DOE and the American Institute for Research: Units for Beginner ELLs. Finally, the ENL teacher frequently draws upon the Understanding by Design Framework (UbD) when planning lessons, in particular its focus on the student's ability to effectively use content knowledge and skill. As stated by UbD, "Understanding is revealed when students autonomously make sense of and transfer their learning through authentic performance. Six facets of understanding—the capacity to explain, interpret, apply, shift perspective, empathize, and self-assess—can serve as indicators of understanding." 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 6  For the majority of our ELLs--currently 81%--Spanish is the home language, which our ESL teacher is fluent in, thus facilitating home language evaluation. For our lower grade students--where most of our Entering ELLs are--she evaluates their phonemic awareness, vocabulary, story comprehension, retelling and sequencing skills as well as content-area knowledge in Spanish, both in groups and individually. The use of visuals is often used as well. For our Chinese and Arabic students we have been able to make use of parents and/or the occasional interpretation of a strong 5 th -grade student, which we are planning to integrate into a Community Service element. In the 3 upper grades we only have 2 Entering ELLs, both of whom are literate in their home languages, one in Spanish and one in Chinese. The ENL teacher will reach out for Chinese reading materials and interpreters to provide HL evaluations. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We have no SIFE and no Long Term ELLs in our school. First of all, entering level students receive more ENL instruction time, as per CR-Part 154 mandates than transitioning ELLs do. Instruction is differentiated by a deeper focus on strengthening the 4 modalities and English language literacy skills of entering students. Our entering and emerging students are given greater use of visuals and the opportunity to present written work in ways that address the content and standards but not in the quantity and quality required of most students. Transitioning students are given scaffolded support as well, particularly with graphic organizers and target academic vocabulary work. In either case, though, the ENL teacher clearly understands that the same NYSITELL or NYSESLAT level for students does not mean that every student in that level has the same proficiencies across modalities or standards. Groupings within levels must be ongoing and data-informed and not fixed based on the April exam. Former ELLs are given support by being provided with organizers and target academic vocabulary work as well. Given our large ELL population, the weekly meetings with the teachers and review of student work can offer insight into their ongoing needs. All ELLs and former ELLs--for two years--receive testing accommodations. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use small group instruction to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. In an ICT class, ELL-SWDs are grouped hetereogenously by language proficiency and homogeneously by academic skill level. Additionally, teachers of ELL-SWDs provide longer wait time, pair and group work, use of manipulatives and realia, choral repetition, language prompts, sentence frames and accountable talk. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? --Curricular and Instructional flexibility - The following instructional tools are used to insure that ELL-SWDs are given every opportunity to access our Common Core State Standard aligned Curriculum: Can Cards -as explained in the section on RtI-, multi-sensory access to content through field trips, class projects, center activities, our music, dance, Spanish and art program. --Schedule flexibility - Our 1 ELL-SWD in K is currently in our only ICT class where there is one certified Special Education teacher and one certified General Education teacher. In addition, ELL-SWDs are pulled out for ESL class during small group instruction so they do not miss instructional time in their classroom. Lastly, SETTS and Speech service providers work together with the ENL teacher to coordinate their schedules to insure ELL-SWDs are receiving the necessary instruction to 7  meet their IEP goals and attain English proficiency. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school is currently revising and adjusting our intervention programs with an eye to be targeted and strategic in groupings. Our SETTS teacher is currently working with lower grade ELLs who figure in the lowest third in their classes as demonstrated on the F&P running records. She provides targeted work using Wilson/Fundations. These services are in English. Our 1 ELL in 1st with an IEP receives bilingual SETTS in Spanish/English from an outside provider during the school day. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? An improvement goal is clearly to target the literacy skills of our lower grade students. Another new program is one that will have various teachers each month (two pairs) participating in Inquiry-to-Action work at Teachers College. The ESL teacher and SETTS teacher attend the same cycle, which--importantly for both in their work--focuses exclusively on UDL. As a result of the year-long inquiry and study of our own school and students via the lens of UDL, we hope to bring improvements in that key access to the curriculum for the upcoming year and beyond. Aligning all lessons to the new language progressions would be a great and effective way to improve instruction. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The school has never had a bilingual program. Our parents prefer freestanding ENL over bilingual and some are interested in dual language when they come in to learn about the choices they have in regards to programs for their newly identified ELL student. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All our ELLs are afforded access to all school programs, i.e. extended day, after-school programming, art, dance, music and Spanish. There are no pre-requisites to applying for these programs so that all ELLs may have access in the same way as do their non-ELL peers. In addition, the ESL Teacher ensures that all communication regarding these programs is sent in the home language, in fact he translates many letters that do go home in the language preferred by the guardian on file. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials used to support all ELLs include: laptops, iPads, Promethean Boards, Elmos, math manipulatives, FOSS science kits, a list of kinesthetic movements in lower grade Fundations work, which ELLs use to support language learning, and the acquisition of comprehension skills, organizational skills and communication skills. Ell students are also able to log into their Iready accounts during school hours, extended day and at the leisure of their homes. The iready program is another way that students are targeted at their level and constantly assessed and their progress monitored. It offers instant data collection that is available for the teacher and the student to review and to plan accordingly. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? For the majority of our ELLs--currently 81%--Spanish is the home language, which our ENL teacher is fluent in, thus facilitating home language evaluation. For our lower grade students--where most of our Entering ELLs are--she evaluates their phonemic awareness, vocabulary, story comprehension, retelling and sequencing skills as well as content-area knowledge in Spanish, both in groups and individually. The use of visuals is often used as well. For our Chinese and Arabic students we have been able to make use of parents and/or the occasional interpretation of a strong 5th-grade student, which we are planning to integrate into a Community Service element. In the 3 upper grades we only have 2 Entering ELLs, both of whom are literate in their home languages, one in Spanish and one in Chinese. The ESL teacher will reach out for Chinese reading materials and interpreters to provide HL evaluations. 8  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Since the ENL services and supports are so directly linked to the school's curriculum map, pacing calendar and weekly grade-level meetings, the correspondence is ensured in large part by the curricular choices made by the experienced teachers at each grade level with administrative oversight of the entire curriculum's meeting of the CCLS already present. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The instructional materials used to support all ELLs include: laptops, iPads, Promethean boards, Elmos, math manipulatives, FOSS science kits, a list of kinesthetic movements in lower grade Fundations work, which ELLs use to support language learning, and the acquisition of comprehension skills, organizational skills and communication skills. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Parent and child are welcomed before the school year at the registration process as well as at a school-wide picnic held the week before school. The parent coordinator, Sylvia Gonzalez, provides parents with much information regarding our school and its programs as well. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this point in time we do not offer a language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? There are at least 3 key points of focus: 1. The presentation and clarification of recent changes in the DOE regarding ELLs, from the intake, NYSITELL, NYESESLAT, and levels to recent DELLS-published guides to instruction and langauge development. 2. The ESL attends Professional development sessions at the Fordham Univeristy Bilingual Deptartment. Throughout the year, different sessions are offered to train and inform ENL teachers about the regulations, upcoming changes impacting the field. 3. The Manhattan Field Support Center is planning on implementing a study group that will focus on spoken to written language. It is scheduled to begin this fall and the ENL teacher will participate. The findings of the study group will be shared amongst staff members during Professional learning cycles. The strategies and resources learned from the study group will be shared and implemented during integrated ENL service periods with teachers serving the ENL population. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 9  Our 5 th grade teacher take students on tours of middle schools where most of our students tend to enroll upon graduation from here. These tours begin as early as October and continue throughout the year to enable children to experience first-hand the very same middle schools they are considering. Parents can attend. The teachers also conduct middle school Q & A information sessions to assist parents with the application process as well as information--given in the DOE handbook--on the many, many middle schools in the DOE. The Parent Coordinator is very involved with the dissemination of this information as well. Our school, and its leadership in conjunction with District 6 support has laid a detailed mapped document of our professional development that includes ELL-specific content. The ENL teacher attends frequent, targeted, long-term professional development, which can then be shared with to the entire staff. Particular focus this year is the year-long work he is engaged in--along with the SETTS teacher at the Inclusive Classrooms Project's Inquiry-to-Action group at Teachers College, Columbia University. The ENL teacher and SETTS teacher attend the same cycle, which--importantly for both in their work--focuses exclusively on UDL. As a result of the year-long inquiry and study of our own school and students via the lens of UDL, we hope to bring improvements in that key access to the curriculum for the upcoming year and beyond. Agendas and attendance sheets are handed out and collected at every single Monday professional development. The ENL teacher attends and participates in training sessions to learn how to plan and implement curriculum and lessons that are aligned to the new language progressions. This work is crucial to ensure that all students, regardless if they are ENL or not are learning materials that are common core aligned. This helps the ENL population to engage in learning opportunities that are rich in content and language. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our plan this year is to approach these meetings outside the dates of P/T conferences and to include the option of before and after school. Sibling parents will meet once to discuss siblings to facilitate the organization and convenience of the meetings for parents; we have 8 pairs of ELL siblings currently, 16 students. Initial meetings for lower grade parents will be held in December this year and November next year. That said, all new K children have had 1:1 meetings with the ENL teacher in which the child's NYSITELL assessment results were discussed. A second round will be held before administering the NYSESLAT and once again at the end of year to provide stragegies and resources for summer learning. Translation for the 6 Chinese student is easily facilitated by the fact that the father of 2 sisters is fluent in Spanish and the other 4 are all related and have the same family member interpreting. The two Arabic-speaking sisters do not require interpretation with their father. That said, we would--as always here--reach out to parents or the DOE to provide interpretation services, especially since we do not rely on children to interpret in matters regarding academic achievement. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental Involvement- Since our school was founded just over eight years ago by a group of parents and teachers, parents represent a central element of overall school functioning. Every parent is strongly encouraged to volunteer time helping out during the school day, or with the schoolnewsletters, digital media, meetings, special functions, etc. As such, there are Spanish-speaking parents who can be found reading in Spanish to a child, preparing movie night and distributing supplies and notices to classrooms, volunteering in the lunchroom, organizing cultural events such as theater series, our yearly school-wide Carnegie Hall concert series, as well as participating in our school-wide Friday morning Sing-Alongs. CBOs such as the Northern Manhattan Alliance and the Global Language Project provide workshops and resources for parents periodically. The Parent Coordinator, as well as many of the teachers also offer evening workshops on topics such as: Reading with your child at home, Helping your child with the new Math curriculum, and Using the native language to help your child in school. The Parent Coordinator (a native Spanish speaker) does active outreach at every level on a continual basis. Since we are a small school, we get to know all our families personally. When families present situational difficulties, we have regular services provided by the building's Social Worker, School Psychologist and Occupational Therapist of PS 153, on the floor below us. Parents seek out our school through word-of-mouth precisely because of our strong sense of community. Upon registration, every parent is presented with a contract they must adhere to, and which includes active parent participation. There are many Spanish-0  speakers on staff and so there is always someone available to translate into Spanish. For translation into other languages such as Chinese, we have a few parents who speak both and can serve as translators, as well our current intention to reach out more to the DOE's own translation and interpretations services. Our Parent Coordinator meets with parents regularly to get their input as to their needs. Since parents form part of the School Leadership team, they voice their concerns and their ideas at the monthly SLT meetings. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Deirdre Budd, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Hamilton Heights School School DBN: 06M368 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Deirdre Budd Title Principal Assistant Principal Sylvia Gonzalez Parent Coordinator Wileydi Peguero ENL/Bilingual Teacher Manuel Ramirez Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 3 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: HAMILTON HEIGHTS SCHOOL Superintendent: M. RAMIREZ DBN: 06M368 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Wileydi Peguero ENL Coordinator/Teacher Sylvia N/A N/A Rodriguez Parent Coordinator N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A Yes Yes N/A N/A * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. While other home languages are spoken, Spanish is the language most needed for translation services. For decisions on which language is needed for written and oral communication with parents we rely on the emergency "blue card", the HLIS and on biographical information solicited by classroom teachers at the beginning of each school year. Of course our parent coordinator is also key in providing greater awareness of parental language preference. . 4  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 1 3 2 95 1 30 N/A N/A N/A Afrikaans Arabic Chinese English French Spanish N/A N/A N/A 0.76 2.27 1.52 71.97 0.76 22.73 N/A N/A N/A 1 2 2 95 1 31 N/A N/A N/A 0.76 1.52 1.52 71.97 0.76 23.48 N/A N/A N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 5  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents that are translated include the following: annual handbooks, class, and school newsletters, annual and monthly calendars, announcements for parent-teacher conferences, including sign-up sheets and translated copies of report cards, after-school program information, field trip information, including permission slips, permission slips for photographing, videotaping, and the use of class blogs, NYS testing dates, curriculum overview, letters from school leadership and reminders of all sorts, including those for school events such as multi-cultural day, movie night, and meetings. August-October After administering the ENL screening assessments. Once a month Weekly Any time a new student joins our school community and needs translation services. NA NA NA N/A N/A N/A The school will utilize in house translation personnel when applicable. We will contact the NYC DOE In your Language Department at (718) 935-2013 or by emailing Hello@schools.nyc.gov when family specific needs arise and whose languages are not translated in-house and which fall under the NYC DOE nine languages. N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Our school adheres to the DOE-designated dates and times for parent-teacher conferences and curriculum nights. We also have designated the third Tuesday of every month, during Parent Engagement time, to be dedicated to teachers either providing information, a review, a demo lesson, or presentation of strategies and/or content-area games to parents. NA NA NA Parent Teacher Conferences (Sept., Nov., March and May) Parent Workshops (Dec., Feb., April) interpretation service(s)? The school will utilize in house translation personnel when applicable. We will contact NYC DOE In your Language Department at (718) 935-2013 or by emailing Hello@schools.nyc.gov when family specific needs arise and whose languages are not translated in house and which fall under the NYC DOE nine languages. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 6  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In order to reach families in the event of a school emergency, the administration, along with the parent coordinator and language access coordinator will send a message using JupiterEd in all the languages preferred by our school population. Language Line will be utilized for the languages not covered by in house translations. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Professional development will be planned and executed to inform our staff on language access. Information from the language access kit will be displayed in visible areas of our school such as main office, main lobby and staff launch. Language Line access information will be shared with all staff members and will be included in our staff handbook Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Translated copies of the Parents' Bill of Rights and Responsibilities and original copy of Parents' Guide to Language Access are sent home to parents at the beginning of the school year. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school makes a concerted staff-wide effort to obtain parent surveys, targeting pick-up and drop-off times, P/T Conferences as well as backpacking reminders regarding their use. In addition, as a small school of 150 students, our parents do have ample access to staff members. Translated parent surveys will be printed from the intranet and provided for parents to reach all of our population, along with providing an oral survey conducted by the language line for languages that do not have a written format. 7 
