 02M400 School Name: HIGH SCHOOL FOR ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES Principal: AMBER NAJMI SHADID   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: High School for Environmental Studies 02M400 310200011400 9-12 School Number (DBN): 444 West 56 th Street, New York, NY 10019 212-262-8113 212-262-0702 Phone Number: Fax: Maximillian Sugiura msugiura@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 02M Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Amber Najmi Glen Pandolfino Jorge Godoy MaximillianSugiura ElkaSamuels-Smith AgathaGutierrez, GladymarBautista, Lorraine Liu None District Information Vivan Orlen Superintendent: 333 7th Ave, NY, NY 10001 vorlen@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: Phone Number: 212-356-7563 Fax: 212-356-7514 Manhattan FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Yuet Chu   Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7th Ave, NY, NY 10001 Ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 212-356-7514 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Amber Najmi Jennifer Rodriguez Jorge Godoy Marianna Mistretta ElkaSamuels-Smith AgathaGutierrez GladymarBautista N/A MaximillianSugiura Andrea Webb-Davidson Nanuli Houtsishvili *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ CSA/Co-Chair Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lorraine Liu Member/ Student Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of HSES is to promote environmental integrity, social equity and economic prosperity for all learners through challenging hands-on collaborative learning experiences that promote citizenship, scholarship and leadership within our community and the world at large.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. High School for Environmental Studies is a partially screened school that serves 1250 students from grades 9-12. Its diverse body includes 63% Hispanic, 15% Asian, 15% Black, 6% White, and 1% "other" students. The boy/girl ratio is 49:51. Average incoming ELA/Math proficiency is historically 2.60/2.55. Incoming students are programmed into honors or regular classes. 80% of students are on track for graduation after grade 9. The graduation rate was 80% in 2017 and 83% in 2018. The school has multiple partnerships with Community-Based Organizations: Friends of HSES figures prominently in the school’s community work. University partnerships include the University of Vermont, New York University and Cornell. High School for Environmental Studies' graduation rate has held steady at its current rate of 80%, and its graduation rate among peer schools is 52%. Its 4-year College Readiness school index is 50.8% an 8% increase over the 2016 school year levels. The percentage of students earning 10+ credits in 9th grade has increased to 81.4% in 2016-17 marking a 12% gain over the prior year; 60.8% of students in High School for Environmental Studies' lowest third earn 10+ credits in 9th grade. Similar patterns hold true for the percentage of students earning 10+ credits in 10th grade. A significant portion of High School for Environmental Studies' student body enters 11th grade neither on track for graduation, nor on track for college and career readiness. The passing percentages for the Common Core ELA Regents are the High School for Environmental Studies' highest which is a complete change from prior years where ELA Regents scores demonstrated negative trends. 84% of students who took the ELA Common Core regents passed and the average score was a 76.3% representing college and career readiness. Another upward data trend is on the United States History Regents where the average passing score has risen to 74.5% from 71%. Scores for the Common Core Algebra Regents have risen to 65.95% from 64%, as well. Under the leadership of Principal Najmi, HSES is continuing to rebuild the holistic environmental theme of the school by re-infusing the curriculum with environmental topics and CCLS-aligned skills supports for earlier grades. Shelbourne Farms hosts HSES educators during the Summer to revise curricula and plan around further integration of holistic environmentalosm through the lens of sustainability. The NYU Department of Philosophy has partnered with HSES to develop an Environmental Ethics curriculum for Sophomore students. An advanced environmental Ethics course is available for college credit through SUNY's College of Environmental Science and Forestry (ESF). The Rubenstein School at the University of Vermont has partnered to integrate their "whole environment learning model" into freshmen science introductory classes. Freshmen students in need of additional support will be enrolled in classes designed to reinforce literacy (Anita Archer's "Rewards Program"). These academic supports will continue into their second year through targeted academic intervention. HSES will continue its partnership with the Hochman Writing Revolution, which aims to reinforce literacy and writing techniques for all students in the 9th and 10th grades. HSES will continue use of the Meaningful Math curriculum. Partnering further with CBS and NYU's Kanbar School of Film, HSES will be offering Environmental Studio, a year-long continuum Broadcast and Production study that has students create narratives and documentaries about their own history and environmental issues around NYC. We will build off our current offerings of AP Computer Science and a FIRST Robotics Team (The Envirobots) with a new FIRST NYC Robotics and Cornell Tech partnerships that sends a class of students to learning 3-D fabrication and Robotics at a Roosevelt Island Campus site. The Peer Group Leadership (PGL) program will enter its third year at HSES during the 2018-19 school year, providing mentoring and guidance opportunities for high performing students to pair with struggling learners to further extend the school's impact on social-emotional learning. 0  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. English Language Learners (ELLs) account for 9% of the population and Students with Disabilities (SWDs) account for 18.5%. Both populations of students require specialized and individualized services to address their learning needs. Programming and intervention supports are provided as consistent with compliance requirements for special education and CR-154 of the NY State department. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. A 2017-18 Quality Review report conducted in January of 2018 indicated that HSES met "Well Developed" (the highest level) Criteria for 6 of 10 categories aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. The areas where HSES met "Well-Developed" were the following: Curriculum (1.1), Positive Learning Environment (1.4), Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), and Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1). HSES met a "Proficient" rating in the following areas: Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2), High Expectations (3.4), and Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2). HSES received no adverse ratings according to the 2017-18 Quality Review report. In the FSGR 2016 Metrics in Effective School Leadership and Strong Family-Community Ties increased on the FSGR 2016, representing an increased effort by the faculty to engage with families of all learners and present a clear communications strategy from the principal to stakeholders in the school community. Credit Accumulation totals (10+) for students in the first and second year have continued to rise since the return of Principal Najmi. First year students earning 10+ credits has risen to 86.2% in 2018 from 81% in 2017. The 4-year graduation rate has increased from 80% in 2017 to 83% in 2018, marking an increase for the first time in four years. For the second time in six years the high School for Environmental Studies annual attendance rate dropped below 90% (86.5%). On the 2014-15 School Survey 89% of parents affirmed the importance of attendance for student achievement and 68% of students felt that attendance was necessary. Additionally, only 17% of parents responded to the 2017-18 survey (Citywide average for parental response was 49%) although this was a noted increase from 5% in 2016-17. Strong Family-Community Ties is an area of focus at HSES. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M400 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1194 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 91 80 5 32 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 35 11 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 81.0% % Attendance Rate 76.7% % Reduced Lunch 8.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 63.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 6.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.69 0% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 86% 80% 76.7% 20.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES No N/A 214 144 5 84.0% 4.0% 18.8% 16.4% 12.1% 1.5% 10 8% 5.4 N/A N/A 85% 83% 89.0% 37% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A NO YSH YES N/A N/A NO YES YES N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. With 14% of 9th graders not accumulating credits to be on track for graduation, resources to address skill deficits, and a comprehensive review of student programming has been completed. The average incoming freshman enters below grade level (average incoming ELA/Math proficiency is 2.60/2.55). ELA Regents results (50% college readiness) indicate a Humanities program approaching the literacy needs of the student body, which has a ripple effect across subject areas. Literacy in and across the disciplines is insufficient to promote college and career readiness for all students.. 2. On the 2014-15 School Survey, 27% of teachers replied negatively to, “In your first class today how often do most students participate in class discussions at some point?” The delivery of rigorous tasks for all performance levels is sporadic. The inquiry cycle (plan, execute, assess, analyze, adjust, start over) and collaborative practice among teachers rate highly on the SSR 2014-15, but are not sufficiently impacting the achievement of ELLS, SWDs, and the lowest third. 3. Observation of teacher practice (High School Quality Guide) indicates that instruction, in most cases, must be redesigned to differentiate for the higher as well as lower achieving student while anchoring rigorous tasks in rich, primary source texts. The disconnect between student performance and teacher perception warrants investigation into teacher expectations and mindsets, differentiated and rigorous learning tasks, and mental models about student capacity for growth and autonomous learning. Focus:  The High School for Environmental Studies’ Instructional Focus for SY 2018-19 is:  Professional learning will support teachers in designing tasks and assessments that promote students engagement aligned to the instructional focus. Special attention will be paid to boosting literacy through applying school-wide support strategies around literacy such as the Hochman Writing Program and providing teacher leaders with opportunities to design and implement professional learning.  Personal behaviors and mindsets necessary for instruction and aligned to the mission and vision of HSES will be fully integrated into professional development and the curriculum through seminar, staff-trainings, shared readings and PL text analysis, ethics and peer support classes.  Development of teacher fluency with student data to drive instruction and sustain rigor throughout lessons and units. Development of systems of accountability to ensure that teacher teams and inquiry are scrutinized in terms of impact on student achievement. 3   The school has a rich and compelling theme. It offers a raft of AP courses and runs an honors academy. Students take 3 years of world language with expanded offerings in Mandarin and Computer Programming. The tradition and former status of the school is a source of pride that is being reborn in progressive programs and partnerships.  Teachers are committed to the students and to their own professional growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 28 of the 2018-19 school year HSES will increase the overall four-year school-wide graduation from 83% (August 2018 data) to 86% through the use of pedagogical supports to increase levels of rigor in differentiated instruction, targeted professional development and collaboration between teachers to drive conversations and changes needed in school culture. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Develop rigorous and engaging individualized activities that appeal to a broad range of student learning styles and interests. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students, including ELLs, SWDs, and Lowest 1/3, Black and Hispanic Males 4 Cycles of Intervisitation and Lesson Study Teachers, Teacher Teams, Assistant Principals, Principal October: cycle 1 December cycle 2 January Cycle 3 March Cycle 4 Ongoing throughout the year Teachers, Teacher Teams, Assistant Principals, Principal All students, including ELLs, SWDs and Lowest 1/3, Black and Hispanic Males Communicate and support Instructional Focus that is aligned with CCLS, Framework for Great Schools, and Danielson Rubric. All students will engage in cognitively challenging learning activities that require:  Reading level appropriate texts with a focus on comprehension and acquisition of academic and subject specific vocabulary;  Writing that requires students to make claims  supported by textual evidence; Speaking that requires students to converse with each other, develop their own questions, and utilize academic and subject specific vocabulary. All students, including ELLs, SWDs, and Lowest 1/3 Teacher teams to engage in critical inquiry process: examine student work to determine modifications to curricular materials and instructional strategies to address needs of all students. Ongoing monitoring of impact on student achievement. All students, including ELLs, SWDs, and Lowest 1/3, Black Ongoing through year at biweekly teacher team meetings Teachers, Teacher Teams, Assistant Principals, Principal 5 Professional Development/Professional Learning Teacher Team will meet with interdisciplinary and grade-level teacher teams and administration to determine teacher needs and plan professional development opportunities for teachers to nurture their professional growth. Professional learning will focus on how to design, implement, and continuously revise rigorous learning opportunities and assessment for all students. Systems of supervision and accountability set in place to determine impact of teacher teams and collaboration on student achievement. Staff will engage in a year-long professional learning arc focused on rigorous instruction and its impacts student achievement through the lens of equity and holistic environmentalism (conservation and social justice) Teachers, Teacher Teams, Assistant Principals, Principal All staff members and Hispanic Males All students, including ELLs, SWDs, and Lowest 1/3, Black and Hispanic Males All students, including ELLs, SWDs, and Lowest 1/3, Black and Hispanic Males Ongoing throughout year at weekly teacher team meetings during professional development time. Weeks of 9/7 and 11/7 with follow up in 2018 Spring. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. HSES administrators will communicate high expectations and curriculum alignment to student families during Student Orientation and Open Houses throughout the school year. 2. Parent Coordinator runs workshops with the PTA in order to facilitate family understanding of academic and social/emotional skills needed for students to succeed at HSES. the Parent Coordinator arranges these meetings with workshop leaders and outside guests. 3. Curriculum Night (AKA Family Night) @ HSES is held on September 21-22 in order to educate families about course sin which their children are enrolled. The AP of Organization coordinates this evening with all faculty. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. 80 minute PD sessions every Monday and 35 minutes on Tuesdays. 2. Content area teachers programmed for iZone online courses. 3. Individual meetings scheduled for each teacher (Initial Planning Conference and after every observation). 4. Observation cycle (MOTP) reinforces Instructional Focus to ensure all students are receiving rigorous learning opportunities. 6  5. Professional Development/Professional Learning Teacher Team meetings at minimum once monthly to plan, implement, and improve delivery of professional learning. 6. School-wide enrollment in the Hochman Writing Revolution program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, scholarship data will indicate that at least 82% of students in their fourth year are on pace towards graduation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 1. Internally audit transcripts for all students following the first semester (end of January 2019) that will serve as a guide of program effectiveness and readjustment. 2. ADVANCE MOTP Score Reports will be reviewed at mid-year to determine growth in key areas of rigorous instruction and assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The School Survey Report and evaluative visits for 2017-18 recognize the school’s efforts to maintain a supportive environment and available guidance services, but the attendance rate dropped to 86.2%. Examination of the data workbook included with the NYC School Quality Guide shows that attendance is the major factor in students not achieving success. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. For the 2018-2019 school year we will increase the attendance rate of 9th grade students to 95% and 10th grade students to 90% or higher as measured by the ATS report RSAL. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School-wide attendance campaign involving all stake holders (students, parents, teachers, administrators guidance, and CBOs). Professional Development time is aligned with teachers schedules as per UFT contract to provide time for parent outreach every Tuesday. All students. Attendance goals in place for department supervisors and teachers. Attendance referenced in all post-observation conferences. Supervisors monitor teacher outreach via Skedula. Principal monitors APs on progress toward attendance goals. All students, including ELLs, SWDs, and Lowest 1/3 Attendance Teacher makes home visits to identify students with poor attendance and develop plans with family. This plan will also apply to incoming students. All students, including ELLs, SWDs, and Lowest 1/3 Attendance team, Attendance Campaign Committee.Guidance Counselors, Teachers, Assistant Principals, Principal, Parent Coordinator, CBOs Guidance Counselors, Teachers, Assistant Principals, Principal, students Attendance Teacher Ongoing throughout the year with interventions starting in September Observation cycle dates: September-October: Cycle 1 November-December: Cycle 2 January-February: Cycle 3 March-April: Cycle 4 Initial Planning September-October and 1st round of visits. October Attendance Team Meets to revise list. 9 Peer Counseling Group (PGC) program will assign mentor students to lower-class students with low attendance in order to reinforce study skills, attendance rates and support social/emotional learning. Select juniors and seniors and freshmen with targeted attendance numbers, including ELLs, SWDs, and Lowest 1/3 November -January: Attendance teacher reaches out to families of Long Term Absentees and Chronic Absentees to create plan. September-October: Initial Meeting and goal-setting Guidance Counselors, Teachers (program coordinators), students January: Check-in and revision of attendance and academic interventions. February-June: Students monitor and provide feedback to freshmen. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Professional learning models for home visits by teaching staff, outreach from pupil personnel and guidance counselors and more frequent open school/parent-teacher nights will align to push the message of attendance as the most important metric that aligns to student success. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 0   Weekly attendance meetings for attendance team and attendance campaign committee.  Bilingual teachers assigned to attendance outreach as mandated during PD time assignment. All teachers have attendance outreach one day per week as C6 assignment.  Donated movie tickets for attendance raffles.  Attendance teacher on staff to make home visits during summer classes and in a part-time capacity during the school year.  PCG students will report levels of successes and monitor attendance for freshman students to which they are assigned. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Attendance will be monitored at weekly Attendance Team meetings. 9th grade Attendance will be at 92% or higher by end of the first term. Although this would appear the goal has already been met, prior attendance data hints at lower Spring attendance rates. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance will be monitored using the ATS report RSAL to determine daily attendance patterns. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Feedback from the 2016-17 School Quality Guide showed that curricula at HSES is aligned to Common Core Learning Standards, and that the curriculum emphasizes higher order skills. Teachers have responded positively to these curricular shifts, however, the 2015-16 School Quality Snapshot shows that credit accumulation lags behind similar schools. The NYC Progress Reports for the past three years have shown that credit accumulation rates, an indicator of progress towards graduation, is an area of weakness for the school, especially for students in the School’s Lowest Third. The school must continue and expand on the work of sharing best practices to ensure success for all students. On the 2016-17 School Survey Report teachers expressed confidence in their ability to design instruction and differentiate to meet the needs of all students. This perception is not substantiated by student achievement metrics or student perceptions. HSES administration and teacher leaders have collaborated to design PD opportunities that tie the needs of the school's lowest third with skills and knowledge deficit interventions. These interventions are built by grade level teams in PD who analyze student work for patterns of understanding. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In the 2017-18 school year, 86% of students in their first year earned 10+ credits. For the 2018-19 school year, the school will increase the percentage of students in their first year earning 10+ credits to 89% or higher. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The canon of courses available to students will be expanded by hiring new teachers and developing curricula to cover a larger range of subject-specific and elective offerings for all students. This strategy will reduce overall class size, improve credit accumulation and increase student engagement. All students, including ELLs, SWDs, and Lowest 1/3 Teachers, Assistant Principals, Principal Pre-planning in summer of 2018. November 6 - Curriculum revision with partner CBOs. January - Progress Monitoring and development of new programs based on student need and interest. Examine curriculum for courses where students have not met with success for gaps/inconsistency in collaborative teacher teams. Teacher teams will engage in rigor analysis to ensure that students at all levels are provided with cognitively challenging and engaging work. All students, including ELLs, SWDs, and Lowest 1/3 September- Review of regents and scholarship data. Teachers, Assistant Principals, Principal Each marking period, scholarship meetings between administrators and teachers to address assignments and other patterns of need for growth in classrooms. 3 Teacher teams will collaborate during PD time to examine student work and determine modifications to instructional strategies. Particular focus will be paid to reading comprehension and delivery of academic and subject specific vocabulary for subgroups of ELLs, SWDs. and lowest 1/3. All students, including ELLs, SWDs, and Lowest 1/3 Professional Development/Professional Learning Teacher Team will meet with interdisciplinary teacher teams and administration to determine teacher needs and plan professional development opportunities for teachers to nurture their professional growth. All students, including ELLs, SWDs, and Lowest 1/3 2 Mondays each month. Teachers, Assistant Principals, Principal Teachers, Assistant Principals, Principal 4 Cycles of Intervisitation and Lesson Study October: cycle 1 December cycle 2 January Cycle 3 March Cycle 4 PD Planning will be every other Monday, each month. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. Teaching staff will conduct outreach on a weekly basis during scheduled Tuesday Parent Outreach. This outreach takes place every Tuesday over the course of the entire school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teacher Teams will evaluate effectiveness of instructional changes based on student work products in twice-weekly team meetings.  Teams will complete surveys of teachers and plan professional development accordingly.  Teachers will meet as a Professional Learning Team once per month to design PD instruction.  Professional development schedules will change from 90 minutes PD sessions every first Monday along with ADVANCE PD sessions four times per month and teacher team meetings 4 times per month during C-6 time, to additional 90 and 80 minute sessions each Monday and Tuesday beyond the workday. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 4  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Teacher Teams will evaluate effectiveness of instructional changes based on student work products in weekly team meetings.  Teacher Teams will share findings at weekly Advance professional leaning sessions.  Teacher Teams will evaluate effectiveness of implemented strategies at end of each marking period, and at end of each term.  By the end of the first term in the 2016-17 school year, at least 82% of students in their first year will have earned at least 5 credits. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Scholarship reports will be run after every Marking Period to assess trends in individual teacher class pass rates and credit accumulation for the general population and for black and Hispanic males, the school's target subgroup. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2018 Quality Review, HSES has demonstrated strength in some key metrics related to school leadership and struggles in others. "Program Coherence" and "Instructional Leadership" scored above the citywide averages. "Program coherence" scored 81% over the citywide average of 78%. Instructional Leadership" scored 90% as opposed to a citywide score of 81% representing a positive perception of administrative experience and support in Teacher practice and observation. "Inclusive Leadership" and "Teacher Influence" scored below the citywide averages which represents a disconnect in how teachers perceive their role in impacting instructional and organizational decisions. In the 2017-18 school year, the scores for first year students who entered at a 1.8 or lower ELA score level enrolled in the Rewards program (with 85% or higher attendance) increased their average reading level by 2.67 grades according to summative multi-syllabic reading tasks in June compared to the baseline assessment in September. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  For 2018-19 school year, students who entered at a 1.7 or lower ELA score level will enroll in the Rewards program and will increase their average reading level by an average of 50 or more sight words per minute. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Targeted Professional development in the Hochman Writing Revolution to support literacy and writing skills for students in 9th and 10th grade, especially SWDs, ELLs and the school's lowest third who have demonstrated the greatest difficulty with achieving grade-level proficiency in literacy skills. Principal/ Administrators/ Teachers Teachers/Administrators Professional Development begins in Summer of 2018 September - December 2018, as teachers will implement the curriculum in Humanities and Science classes throughout the school year. Integration of school-wide instructional focus in curricula during professional development collaboration. Focus will be on Teachers and all students including SWD's, ELLs and the Lowest 1/3. Ongoing throughout 2018-19 Principal/ Administrators/ teacher Leaders  Reading and writing at grade level   standards, Focusing explicitly on development of critical thinking skills including the development of a claim and counterclaim. Integrating a holistic environmental theme into curricula when applicable. September- November: Integration of Environmental Themes January-February: 7 Teacher Teams will evaluate effectiveness of implemented strategies at end of each marking period using scholarship data, and at end of each term analyzing Regents data. Teachers and all students including SWD's, ELLs and the Lowest 1/3 Revision of skill standards and target areas based on Hochman feedback and Regents assessments. Each Marking Period (6 times per year) Teachers/Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. HSES School Implementation team and IEP teacher will reach out to students at levels of 1.7 or below who are programmed for reward to inform students and families of course expectations and purpose. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Rewards Program student workbooks and digital resources Hochman Program membership costs Class coverage for the Rewards program teacher to conduct individual assessment of students for Baseline data Class coverage for teachers receiving training in the Hochman Writing Program Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By January of 2019, a mid-year formative assessment will be given to students enrolled in the Rewards program with estimated reading level gains averaged at 1.5 grade levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 8  Baseline assessments for Rewards will establish reading and decoding levels. These assessments will be administered in September of 2018. Formal summative assessments will be administered in June of 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Feedback from the 2015-16 NYC School Survey as reported in the Framework for Great School Report indicated that 15% of parents at HSES responded to the survey. Teacher-parent and Parent-principal trust were two metrics on the FGSR 2016 that scored even or slightly above the city-wide averages under the "Trust" component of the Framework. The measures of Strong Family and Community Ties on the FGSR 2016 shows that outreach to parents and parent involvement in schools were both areas in need of improvement. Although outreach to parents scored 86 and the citywide average is 87, the "Parent Involvement in Schools" metric was significantly lower at 71 versus 77 citywide. It is evident from the data that parents feel that their voice is not fully incorporated into the school culture and activities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In the 2018-19 school year, the High School for Environmental Studies will increase parent involvement and feedback by increasing the NYC School survey response rate from 17% to 30%. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? On Tuesdays, 40 minutes of professional development time of the 80 allocated PD minutes will be used for parent outreach. Outreach will consist of phone calls, online communication via email, Pupilpath and scheduled in-person meetings. The parent coordinator will conduct ongoing outreach to families, host workshops with content related to college and career readiness, SWD and ELL compliance and accommodations, social and emotional learning, instruction and interventions to support all students while placing on emphasis on SWDs, ELLs and the schools Lowest Third.. Teachers Parents/ Students Members of the Instructional support Services department will conduct outreach to incoming SWDs and ELLs over the 2018 summer session in order to address previously existing attendance patterns and creating an intervention support network prior to the beginning of the 2018-19 school year. Parents/ Students Teachers/ Administrators/ Parent Coordinator/ Parent Coordinator/ Teachers Teachers Ongoing throughout the entire school year Outreach and introductions in the fall of 2018. Needs assessment conducted At the third Wednesday of Every month following the SLT meeting, the PTA will convene to cover these topics. Outreach begins in summer 2018 Follow-up and PTA invitations to parents in Fall of 2018 HSES staff will develop clear channels to families, increasing outreach on the part of teachers and our parent coordinator Parents/ Students/ New technology Teachers/ 1 using new technology programs (Kinvolved), and communicating consistent measures of progress with all members of the faculty. Administrators programs begin use in November of 2018 and ongoing throughout 2018-19 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Outreach to all families regarding new use of technology for daily and weekly communication will begin in September of 2018. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Parent Coordinator will conduct PTA meetings with the support of faculty in outreach and translation  services. School Leadership Team will host parent members to create and refine the Comprehensive Education Plan for HSES on the third Wednesday of each month in the 2018-19 school year.  Teachers will have a designated outreach time allotted in their Professional Development schedule for 40 minutes on Tuesdays in the 2018-19 school year.  HSES administration will allocate portions of the budget to cover costs for Technology upgrades and subscriptions to Kinvolved. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January of 2019, the number of parents/families registered for Pupilpath will increase from 350 to 750. By January of 2019. PTA involvement will increase to 30 families per session according to Parent Coordinator attendance records. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2   The NYC School survey Report will provide aggregate Student/Teacher/Parent survey response rates.  ATS Grade report RDAL will be used to determine daily attendance and lateness trends.  Incoming student data will be delivered via PCL and SEMS data and analyzed using data analysis tools in Microsoft Excel. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ELLs, SWDs, Students in the Lowest Third, students identified as at-risk Mathematics ELLs, SWDs, Students in the Lowest Third, students identified as at-risk Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Writing Support class for 9th and 10thgrade students to prepare for grade level standards. Use of Anita Archer's Rewards Program for students arriving with a 1.7 or lower ELA/Math . After-school Student Study Center. Renaissance Learning Accelerated Reader software. Integrated ELL co-teaching instruction and ICT settings for SWDs. Speech teachers provide mandated services for students with speechand language impairments.IEPTeacher will work with students whose literacy levels (as measuredby the Rewards Program) warrant additional small group support into their second year with Global History curricular literacy supports. Support courses for students with lower 8th grade Math scores. Math Center. After-school Student Study Center. Assessment is conducted through Whole class, small group, one-to one. Tutoring. During and after school day. Whole class, small group, one-to one. Tutoring. During and after school day. 4  Science Social Studies ELLs, SWDs, Students in the Lowest Third, students identified as at-risk ELLs, SWDs, Students in the Lowest Third, students identified as at-risk At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students identified as at-risk Renaissance Learning's STAR Math software. Online support intervention is provided through the Math Space program. Foundations Editions of Biology texts. Whole class, small group, one-to one. Tutoring. After-school Student Study Center. During and after school day. Whole class, small group, one-to one. Tutoring. During and after school day. Small group, one-to one. Tutoring. During and after school day. Environmental ethics course reinforcing critical thinking skills and standards for all 10th grade students. After-school Student Study Center. IEP Teacher will work with students whose literacy levels (as measuredby the Rewards Program) warrant additional small group support into their second year with Global History curricular literacy supports. Individual and group counseling for at risk students. Advisory for 100 students (grades 9-12) with low attendance and low credit accumulation. Referrals to after school tutoring, health and family services. RAPPand Day One relationship abuse counselor, SAPIS counselor, The Jewish Board counselor. Evaluations and referrals for IEPs, three year reviews. Individual and group academic counseling as a mandated service. 5  6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 84 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STH receive educational materials including clothing, loose leaf notebooks, writing implements, gym uniforms (t-shirts, sweatshirts and shorts) and a backpack for their goods. STH who do not have the financial means to afford locks for lockers are provided complimentary of the school. STH students can be referred for counseling from the Jewish Board and receive hardship awards and scholarships as they approach graduation. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). This section does not apply as we are a title I school. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  This section does not apply as we are a title I school. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. This section does not apply as we are a title I school. 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teachers are hired based on appropriate licensing at time of employment. All teachers are provided with professional development opportunities planned by the Professional Development /Professional Learning Teacher Team made up of teachers from all disciplines. All teachers participate in Teacher Teams that meet weekly to refine curricula and instructional practices. Professional development is planned for each month by the team based on feedback from teachers. New teachers are mentored by a teacher with and an MOTP ADVANCE rating of Highly Effective. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The school's Professional Development/Professional Learning Team (comprised of teachers from all disciplines, Special Education teachers, and Assistant Principals) plans professional learning for all staff in the school. During weekly ADVANCE Professional Development, teachers are provided professional learning in small groups to focus on areas of growth identified by analysis of 2018-19 MOSL and MOTP. Professional development for the year is focused on providing rigorous instruction and assessment with higher-order extensions including supports for students in the lowest third, ELLs and SWDs. Professional development is provided for all teachers at weekly Professional Development sessions, planned and facilitated by the Professional Development/Professional Learning Team. Monday sessions are a full 80 minutes, with 40 minutes of Tuesday's session dedicated to family outreach and the remaining 40 minutes dedicated to collaboration in teacher teams. In addition, all teachers participate in academic department teams weekly to examine student work and exchange best practices for all students, including compliance and instruction for ELLs and SWDs. All teams produce agendas, minutes, and goals anchored in student achievement that are reviewed by supervisors and updated on an as-needed basis. 9  Teachers are frequently sent to professional development held by the DOE Manhattan Field Support Center and outside organizations. These members of staff turnkey instructional strategies to relevant faculty members upon their return during PD time. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. This section does not apply to HSES. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). This section does not apply to HSES. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). This section does not apply to HSES. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The Professional Development/Professional Learning Teacher Team and teacher teams work together to develop rigorous uniform assessments aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Teacher teams meet weekly, and the Professional Development/Professional Learning Teacher team meets at least once per month. The administration works with all teachers on selecting appropriate assessment opportunities in department meetings and one-to-one meetings between Assistant Principals and teachers. The MOSL committee selects state and local measures of student learning that are aligned with the CEP goals. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and 0  purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 667,243.00 0 12,366.00 0 6,995,996 x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a,5b,5c,5d,5e 5a,5b,5c Section 8, 2a 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 1   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. High School for Environmental Studies, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The High School for Environmental Studies will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 3  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 4  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The High School for Environmental Studies, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 5  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 6  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 7  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 8  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 9  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: To support the entitled ELLs at our school, this year, HSES will use the Title III grant to continue a Title III Instructional Program. In order to support instruction, the program will be based in the school's library so that students and teachers have access to a variety of resources at all times. During that time, ESL, Instructional Support Service, and subject area teachers will provide supplemental, small group support in Regents level courses and core courses in English, Science (Living Environment, Earth Science, Chemistry), Math (Algebra, Geometry, and Algebra 2/Trigonometry) and Social Studies (Global and US History). The curricula for the Title III study center will mirror the pace and content of the core classroom instruction taking place in the general education classroom setting. The difference is that a focus on literacy and targeted scaffolding of vocabulary and writing skills - supported by the Hochman Writing Revolution Program - will be the primary focus of the study center. Teachers will provide small-group instruction in the English language by both ESL and content area licensed teachers. Small group support will be provided in order to allow students additional time to develop their Cognitive Academic Language Proficiencies (CALPs). After school support also allows for instruction of core content using highly scaffolded methods (ex. Hochman Writing Revolution Outlining activities) and guided instruction using online tools (Ex. Brainpop ESL). 2018-19 The Title III study center will be in operation from the second week of October through the last week of May during the below stated days and times: Wednesday - English/Social Studies from 3:00 PM - 5:00 PM in the HSES Library Thursday - Math/Science from 3:00 PM - 5:00 PM in the HSES Library The Title III study center will serve ELLs in grades 9-12 whose currentl levels of ELA comprehension (as measured by the NYSESALT/NYSITELL) range from Entering to Commanding. Students will be grouped by subject area focus and then subdivided by level of language functioning to provide appropriate levels of instruction. The model used will be one of co-teaching instruction with a flexible grouping model applied for learners of significantly different levels. This will ensure ELLs are provided with no less than 50% direct instruction from a certified ENL teacher. Teachers from every subject area providing assistance through small group instruction. Licensed ESL and content-area teachers will provide targeted assistance in English Language and Literacy support from 3:00 PM to 5:00 PM on Wednesdays and Thursdays as this timing will not interfere with the professional development calendar of the school. ELLs will receive home language supports in the form of dictionaries, subject specific glossaries, translated versions of text (when applicable) and home communication though Kinvolved which translates messages to the family's preferred home language. Based on June 2018 ELA regents data, our ELL subgroup demonstrated the lowest passing rate (40%) and average among all HSES subgroups. This performance indicator is of the highest concern as it shows that many ELLs are at risk for not graduating or demonstrating college and career readiness. Students will be identified, and invited to attend through consultation with subject area and ESL teachers, guidance counselors, using teacher data from uniform periodic assessments, and as identified through assessment and grade data each marking period. Students will be programmed 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information on STARS to ensure and monitor attendance, allowing ELL's to be grouped heterogeneously while receiving the services appropriate to their current level. Based on the ATS Report RLAT from September of 2018, 101 entitled ELLs are to be served by the Title III program. Based on the NYSESLAT exam, of those tested 60% moved one level up from their previous subgroup. 5% moved up two levels from their previous subgroup. 10% of all ELLs who required continued ENL services tested out of the NYSESLAT examination and have achieved Commanding ELL status. The combined efforts of the ESL and content area teachers will help support ELLs in meeting with success in their content area classes and for Regents exams. The High School for Environmental Studies’ Title III program supplements the regularly scheduled English and content area instruction. Program focus will be language support and literacy support in core academic classes, and in-class content review aligned to the Hochman method. Upon consultation with teachers and Guidance Counselors, ELLs who are identified as at risk will be requested to attend for a designated number of hours. The full library resources will be available, and Foundations and Spanish language editions of content area textbooks will be available. Teachers and students will make use of Achieve 3000, Castle Learning online, Discovery Learning online, WorldBook online, Apex Learning, Brainpop, Brainpop ESL, Brainpop Español and Kaplan Regents Prep books in the following subjects: English, US History, Global Studies, Algebra, and Living Environment. These materials are consistent with those used in daily instruction but will be modified to fit the study center model. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Resolve HSES will continue the many of the same professional development activities as last year but new changes have been introduced, as well. The Title III Professional Development program will provide ESL certified teachers to help support ELLs in High School for Environmental Studies' Title III Instructional Program, including ELL/SWDs. All Study Center teachers will participate in workshops to familiarize them with the specific needs of ELLs, Common Core Learning Standards, Academic Language, and Sheltered Instruction. The workshops will be facilitated by the Assistant Principals of the ESL, Science, Math, and Humanities departments (Sugiura, Cornelius, and DeFlorio), and ESL teachers (Ray and Acosta). Sessions will be monthly throughout the year to allow teachers to identify best practices and provide feedback. Topics will include training for SMARTBoard/SMART Response, The Hochman Writing Revolution, Achieve 3000, Castle Learning online, Brainpop ESL and Español, Assessment and Questioning. Professional Learning Opportunities around ENL will meet and exceed a minimum mandate of 15% of PD be focused on ENL learning. The majority of ELLs at 02M400 are black and/or Hispanic male students who constitute our targeted subgroup as aligned to our Instructional Action Plan. this historically underserved subgroup requires the greatest Impact: ELLs will receive focused instruction that directly attends to their learning needs, increased levels of engagement in a more individualized context which will lead to a 20% 2  Part C: Professional Development increase in passing scores on the ELA Regents exam and standards aligned exams in their ELA classes. Names of Providers: M. Acosta (ESL Certification), I. Ray (ESL Certification), J. Rodriguez (ESL/French Certifications), C. Lu (ESL/Mandarin Certifications), S. Jeffries (ESL/Italian Certification), A. Dondero (ESL/French Certification) Schedule: ESL teachers will receive 50% of their professional development through sessions held by the Manhattan Field Support Center, whose calendar and schedule can be found at: https://sites.google.com/a/strongschools.nyc/mfsc/professional-development/ell-plos. As the school year progresses, ESL teachers will enroll in specific sessions targeted to student need at HSES. 10/9 - ELL Accommodation presentation by Acosta to whole staff. Teachers will receive a review of ENL designations as per CR-154 and an overview of Standalone ENL classwork with common mistakes in literacy that ELLs make. he goal of this session will be to have teachers reflect on how they would address these learning deficits and create goals around ELL performance in their classes based on stndards and identified skill shortage areas. 11/20 - ENL: Accessing Complex Texts for ELLs. This PD is focused on breaking down a complex text with tier II and III vocabulary for ELLs. This PD will apply specifically to ELA, Science and Social Studies Classes. 1/28 - Title III presentation by Sugiura/Rodriguez/Acosta for whole staff: Focus will be on outcomes for all teachers as they assess the impact of their selected strategies from the November PD session and share out successful strategies based on content, ELL designation and grade level. Cost: There is no cost to the Title III program for these PD offerings. Agendas for staff-wide Professional Development and Off-site ENL Professional Learning for staff will be kept in the Principal's Office and Records of Study Center use will be kept with AP of Administration, Maximillian Sugiura. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: In order to provide parents with information to best support their child, quarterly workshops will be offered on use of PupilPath / Skedula and navigation of the school website (www.envirostudies.org) to inform parents about student progress and provide communication with individual teachers, graduation requirements, the college application process and financial aid, resources available at the school, and basic computer skills. These workshops will be presented by the Assistant Principal of ESL (Sugiura) and Parent Coordinator (Adams) and College Counselor (Arkin). In addition parents will be offered bimonthly evening counseling and workshops offered in conjunction with the PTA. Translators will be available for these workshops. Notification will be made through the Phone Messenger, Skedula, and on the school's website as well as mailings and backpack letters. 3  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities The workshop schedule is planned as follows for the 2018-19 school year: October 5th, 2018 - 6:30 PM-7:30 PM (Concurrent with school PTA meeting): Parent Outreach channels and lines of communications for ELLs and their families. December 14th, 2018 6:30 PM-7:30 PM (Concurrent with school PTA meeting) : Financial Aid Opportunities for ELLs. January 11th, 2019 - 6:30 PM- 7:30 PM (Concurrent with school PTA meeting): Teacher Showcase of ENL work with students explaining their process. May 10th, 2019 6:30 PM -7:30 PM (Concurrent with school PTA meeting): Computer Skills for ELLs and their families Each of these workshops drive engagement and participation of families in the learning process. Parents can advocate for their children in these workshops and gain a better sense of what is happening in the classroom building both trust and school-parent relationships. Cost: There is no cost to the Title III program for these parent engagement offerings. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 4  5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Manhattan District 02 School Name High School for Environmental Studies School Number 400 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Amber Najmi-Shadid Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Miriam Acosta/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Rodriguez/ ENL-French Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Sofia Bravershteyn Superintendent Vivian Orlen Assistant Principal Maximillian Sugiura Coach type here School Counselor Michael Genua Parent Norman Gutierrez Parent Coordinator Guillermo Pena-Matos Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Broughton Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 6 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 4 D. Student Demographics 6  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1211 Total number of ELLs 101 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.34% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? During admissions interviews with Guidance Counselors, students who may be ELLs, or over the counter admissions from foreign countries are interviewed by the guidance counselor and the ENL coordinator. Parents are provided with the Home Language Survey (HILS) to determine NYSITELL eligibility. Using the NYSITELL to determine level, students are programmed for the appropriate ENL courses. The ENL courses are structured so that students receive support in their writing and reading of both fiction, and non-fiction texts that support reading, writing, listening and speaking competencies. The Hochman Writing Revolution is used to reinforce literacy skills. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 7  ENL Coordinator receives a professional period each day to complete compliance-based tasks and coordinate supports for ELLs. Multiple ENL licensed member sof staff are available to complete HILS and administer/score NYSITELL exams. Unit planning professional development is held throughout the year to support alignment of student needs with curriculum design and pacing. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Teachers in the ENL Department individually conference with students throughout the year to monitor their progress and provide them with feedback. Teachers meet with the department Assistant Principal to examine individual teacher data, as well as samples of student work.Based on the 73% pass rate on the Living Environment Regents for Beginner level ELLs in June 2016, the school restructured the program slightly to have an ENL teacher push in to ELA content area classes to continue supporting students. NYSESLAT and Regents data is used as performance indicators and baseline progress documents in conjunction with Hochman writing scores and ELA Regents results. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ENL Coordinator and ELA teachers analyze summative data to identify trends in skills in need of support and adjust instruction. The ENL coordinator meets with supervising Assistant Principal to highlight leverage areas and plan for professional learning for the entire staff. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Teachers in the ESL Department individually conference with students throughout the year to monitor their progress and provide them with feedback. Teachers meet with the department Assistant Principal to examine individual teacher data, as well as samples of student work. In addition, the assistant principal of ESL and Instructional Support Services conference to discuss student performance, appropriate placement, and referrals for support. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT, Hochman Formative Assessments, NYSITELL and Regents scores are used to determine placement as per the CR-154 state legislation. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Student NYSESLAT scores are provided to all teachers and tested students in order to provide a measure of student strength and areas in need of improvement at the beginning of the school year. ATS Report RLAT is provided to the ENL coordinator who reviews component scores for each modality on the test. ELLs with IEPs also have NYSESLAT/NYSITELL data entered into IEP documents along with dominant language information and preferred learning styles to help guide instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 8  HSES uses a Freestanding ENL Program with students programmed based on their proficiency level. All ESL classes are taught by two fully licensed ENL teachers. At the Entering and Emerging level, students receive three periods of ENL (675 minutes/week). One of these periods is a co-teaching model. 9th and 10th grade students take a team-teaching English Language Arts class. At the Transitioning and Expanding levels, students receive one daily period of integrated ENL (225 minutes/week). Commanding (Former-ELLs) receive their mandate of 90 minutes of ENL service in integrated ELA classes The school does not have any bilingual classes. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? HSES uses a Freestanding ESL Program with students programmed based on their proficiency level. All ESL classes are taught by two fully licensed ESL teachers. At the Entering level, students receive three periods of ESL (675 minutes/week). One of these periods is a co-teaching model. 9th grade students take a team-teaching Living Environment class, while 10th graders take a team-teaching Global History class. At the Emerging and Transitioning level, students receive two periods of ESL (450 minutes/week) Expanding students are programmed for a period of ESL (225 minutes/week), and one period of English Language Arts (225 minutes/week). Eligible Juniors and Seniors are programmed for an ELA/ENL Regents support class to assist them with the English Regents and college writing. The school does not have any bilingual classes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area class instruction is delivered in English and Social Studies (Global Studies). ENL and content teachers have received training in academic language and acquisition teaching. Living Environment and Global History teachers use layered curriculum. A teacher team has been trained in the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP), and will be turn-keying with staff in order to expand support for students in different content areas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? While there is support for Spanish speakers, the school does not offer a bilingual program. Students are provided opportunity to take major assessments in their native language. Dictionaries and glossaries are provided for testing. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE - SIFE students are first tested with NYSITELL to determine their English Language proficiency. SIFE students are then provided with materials on different reading levels, and online resources alongside instruction as it is detailed in the CR-154. b. Newcomer - Newcomer students are programmed for a full ENL program including a team teaching ELA class using a layered curriculum. c-d. Developing & Long-Term - Long term and Developing ELLs academic records are checked in consultation with the Guidance Counselor. ELLs are programmed for content classes taught by teachers holding ENL licenses. e. Former ELLs - According to CR-154, former ELLs are programmed for 90 minutes of ENL support for two years following their receipt of a commanding score on the NYSESLAT or a score of 63 or higher on the ELA Regents. These students are programmed for Regents exams in ELL rooms and are provided with extended time and glossaries 9  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers use the Hochman Writing Revolution, foundation and bilingual materials, Brainpop, Castle Learning and Achieve3000. We partner with the Lincoln Center LEAD program which integrates theater arts into ELA /ENL classes. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Each ELL-SWD's program is adjusted jointly by the assistant principals of ENL and Instructional Support Services in order to meet the individual needs of students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The after school Study center in the library is staffed by both licensed ENL teachers and content area teachers to provide conferencing, small group instruction, and homework help. Study skills, note-taking skills, task analysis will provide students with familiarity in responding to literacy based items across disciplines. All at-risk students are mandated to attend. Borderline students whose grades are are in the 65-75 range are also mandated to attend. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The use of Acheive3000 will be expanded to all levels of ENL. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. HSES provides all students, including ELLs with a rigorous academic program. The curriculum has not been modified. ELLs are present in all classes, including Advanced Placement courses. The school's after school Study Center is staffed by multiple ENL teachers and content area teachers two days a week. Students are scheduled based on needs, as well as rigor of content. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Acheive 3000, Castle Learning, Discovery Learning, Worldbook online,Brainpop, Brainpop ESL, Brainpop ESL, Edugame, foundations and bilingual editions of textbooks. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The Spanish LAB-R assessment helps determine language levels. ENL classes are taught in English with Spanish support through dictionaries, glossaries, vocabulary scaffolding and integrated support. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Dual entitled students (ELL-SWDs) who have IEPs are evaluated and decisions are made in consultation with the Assistant Principal of Instructional Support Services as to most appropriate placement based on students' needs. To support ELLs in Science, Foundations Editions of Miller & Levine's Biology are available to students. Content is identical, but reading level is simplified. Multilingual glossaries are also available for the text. The Guidance team also reviews student records to ensure ELLs are appropriately placed. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 0  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 9th graders participate in mandatory orientation sessions in June. During placement testing these students are interviewed by the teachers and Assistant Principal of the ENL department to determine the appropriate placement for September. Students who enroll during the school year are provided with a buddy from their ENL class, and mentored by their ENL teacher. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Students may take courses in Spanish, French, Mandarin and Italian. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL teachers at the school have participated in QTEL, and workshops offered through our network and central. In addition, both have served as members of the school's Professional Development Team (made up of teachers from all disciplines, Special Education teachers, ENL teachers, and Assistant Principals) which plans professional development for all staff in the school. Workshops on Academic Language, and Common Core Learning Standards have been facilitated by members of the Professional Development Team. Professional development for the year is focused on supporting students in the lowest third, ELLs and SWDs. Professional development is provided for all teachers at monthly 90 minute Professional Development sessions on the first Monday of each month, planned and facilitated by the Professional Development Team. In addition, all teachers participate in interdisciplinary teacher teams twice weekly to examine student work and exchange best practices for all students, including ELLs and SWDs. Guidance Counselors and paraprofessionals attend PD with instructional staff. Secretaries are provided with PD on handling compliance issues for ENL students. Both ESL teachers have participated in professional development on Common Core Learning Standards offered through the DOE and the school's network, and content area teachers have been provided with PD on SIOP. ENL teachers are encouraged to attend both citywide and state-wide Professional Learning Opportunities (PLO's) 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Guidance Counselors have been provided with training on regulations regarding ENL services, as well as programming requirements for graduation. All staff receive review of CR-154 during Professional development in September to ensure that baseline knowledge of compliance is established school-wide. Professional development is provided for all teachers at monthly 90 minute Professional Development sessions, planned and facilitated by the Professional Development Team. In addition, all teachers participate in subject area and grade level teacher teams twice monthly to examine student work and 1  exchange best practices for all students, including ELLs and SWDs. Agendas and attendance are kept with the Principal's secretary. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Meetings will be scheduled during the day and at Evening Counseling sessions for parents to meet with the student's Guidance Counselor, ENL teacher, and Assistant Principal to review transcripts and student performance in classes. In-house interpretation services are available in Spanish and Chinese, the major languages represented. Attendance sheets and notes will be kept in the student's Guidance folder. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Interpreters are provided for PTA and SLT meetings. Parent ENL workshops have been facilitated by an ENL teacher before each monthly PTA meeting. The Parent Coordinator surveys parents by phone messenger to plan workshop topics. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Amber Najmi Shadid, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: High School for Environmental School DBN: 02M400 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Amber Najmi-Shadid Title Principal Maximillian Sugiura Assistant Principal Guillermo Pena-Matos Parent Coordinator Miriam Acosta ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Jennifer Rodriguez Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Michael Genua School Counselor Vivian Orlen Laura Brown Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/24/2018 9/24/2018 9/24/2018 9/24/2018 9/24/2018 9/24/2018 9/24/2018 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M400 School Name: HS for Environmental Studies Superintendent: VivianOrlen The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Maximillian Sugiura AP of Administration Yes Jennifer Miriam Rodriguez Acosta Teacher Teacher No No Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All parents are greeted by our Parent Coordinator. If a parent indicates that they do not speak English, cards are available for the parent to identify their native language. If in-school interpreters are not available, the DOE’s over the phone translation services are used. All this information is kept in student folders by the Guidance Counselor and Assistant Principal of the ENL Department. Home Language Surveys were consulted, ATS Reports, RPOB, and polling of Guidance counselors and ENL Teachers were used, and analyses of student population in ENL courses, as well as of students who have recently become proficient, and of non-LEP students. These reports are examined on an ongoing basis. 5  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian AMOY (AKA Fukienese) Arabic Bengali (AKA Bangla in Bangladesh) Chinese (ANY) Cantonese French Haitian Creole Mandinka (AKA Mandingo) Mandarin Mossi (AKA More) Nahuatl Nepali English Pilipino (AKA Tagalog) Punjabi (AKA Panjabi) Polish Portuguese Russian Senufo Slovak Spanish (AMERICAN) Sign Language Thai Tibetan Urdu Vietnamese Wolof 9 0 10 46 94 0 3 1 5 0 1 2 3 841 2 2 18 0 1 2 1 793 0 1 1 1 2 3 .49 0 .54 2.49 5.09 0 0.16 .05 0.27 0 .05 .1 .16 45.58 .11 .11 0.98 0 .05 .1 .05 9 4 10 46 59 6 3 1 5 27 1 2 3 836 2 2 18 1 1 1 1 42.98 795 0 .05 .05 .05 .11 .16 1 0 1 1 2 3 .49 .22 .54 2.49 3.2 0.33 0.16 .05 0.27 1.46 .05 .1 .16 45.34 .11 .11 0.98 .05 .05 .05 .05 43.11 .05 0 .05 .05 .11 .16 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 6  N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. September distribution of all documents to students and families Documents As needed and when students are newly registered at HSES DOE provided translated letters and forms HSES Handbook, HSES Student Agreement, Graduation Requirement Documents Official DOE documents and memos Student Intake forms Messages on PupilPath and Kinvolved. Ongoing Immediate translation and transmission via home language preference feature. Our outreach service Kinvolved will be used to automatically translate outgoing texts and robocalls to the parents preferred home language. Parent Newsletters and PTA Newsletter Monthly In-house NYSESLAT informational letter (test dates, grades/level) At the beginning of the school year and during testing period Document is translated in-house and distributed at the beginning of the school year and oe month prior to test administration period to students and families. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Translators for Spanish and Chinese speaking parents are available for all monthly PTA meetings, bi-annual Open School Conferences, and other parent events. Monthly interpretation service(s)? Translation services will be contracted through DOE approved vendor the Big Word for the 2017-18 school year. 7  IEP meetings Ongoing as needed for annual and three-year re-evaluations Translation is provided by bi-lingual psychologist, support staff or Parent Orientation (survey HLIS) Upon registration of new students Suspension and guidance conferences Ongoing Bilingual guidance counselors and ENL coordinator will provide on-site translation. By staff when possible, over the phone using translation services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School messenger services are used with automatic translation into Spanish and Chinese. Kinvolved will automatically translate outgoing texts and robocalls to the parents preferred home language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Training Staff on Policies and Procedure  Email to staff with translation services email, twice a year (including the Chancellor’s Regulations, and number for the translation and interpretation Unit)  During Family Teacher Conferences, memo goes out to teachers to remind of interpretation and how to access the interpreters  Whole staff discussion during PD Ideas: Send letter home explaining language services and entitlements for parents.   Make Language Services signs visible when parents come in.   Training for point personnel on language access requirements and procedures (with special attn to families Language and Request cards available and visible (specifically, in Parent Coordinator Office, Guidance) who may be illiterate) Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 8   Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Interpretation signs are posted in the Main Lobby, Parent Coordinator’s office and Guidance Suite in multiple languages. The Parent Bill of Rights is posted in multiple languages in the Parent Coordinator’s office. Translation cards are at the Main Desk, as well as parent Coordinator’s office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Parent Coordinator and Language Access Coordinator survey parents at PTA meetings, and through School Messenger using interpretation services provided from The Big Word. Translated NYC School surveys are provided to parents in the home language of record and English. Messages about updates on survey completion time lines are delivered by messages which are automatically translated into the home language of preference through Pupilpath. School Messenger automated calls go out in English, Cantonese and Spanish. 9 
