 01M458 School Name: FORSYTH SATELLITE ACADEMY Principal: PATRICK REIMER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Forsyth Satellite Academy 01M458 School Number (DBN): 310100011458 9-12 198 Forsyth Street, New York NY 10002 212-677-8900 Phone Number: 212-260-3063 Fax: School Contact Person: Email Address: Patrick Reimer Preimer@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Patrick Reimer Bryan Finnegan Eileen Villanueva Michael Britto Harry Michel Michael Britto District Information Geographical District: 01 Superintendent’s Office Address: Kathy Rehfield-Pelles Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Room 508, Brooklyn NY 11201 KRehfield@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-923-5102 Phone Number: 718-923-5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Affinity Group Field Support Center, Consortium FSC: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, 6th Floor, Brooklyn, New York, 10001 Executive Director’s Office Address: AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: 718-935-5941 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Patrick Reimer Bryan Finnegan Eileen Villanueva Miriam Villanueva Divine Araujo Chelsea Sanchez Michael Britto Tiffany Mattocks *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent   Name Harry Michel Sarah Charles Katherine Morgennegg TishaniaLouallen Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school’s philosophy is predicated on the Coalition of Essential Schools Principles or Small Schools Network Principles that guides us in incorporating the following throughout our daily work: Learning to use one’s mind well, goals apply to all students, student as worker and teacher as guide/coach, a tone of decency and trust, personalization, resources dedicated to teaching and learning, commitment to the entire school, democracy and equity, less is more/depth over coverage and demonstration of mastery.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Forsyth Satellite Academy is a transfer/alternative high school that gives young adults who have opted out of other high schools the opportunity to earn their high school diploma in a smaller, student-centered learning environment. We are a diverse community of learners who believe in the power of knowledge, words, art, relationships and non-violence. We nurture self-determination, hope and confidence in our students. Our classes are designed to re-awaken students’ love of learning and foster a sense of community. Our school offers students who are over-aged and under-credited the opportunity to grow academically and socio-emotionally so that they are prepared to navigate life after high school (college or the world of work). Our curriculum encourages students to make connections between academics and their experiences outside of school. We firmly believe that “education is liberation” and is achieved through our core values of collaboration, communication and compassion. FSA has been a member of the New York Performance Standards Consortium since 1998, and, as such, our students must complete, present and pass Performance Based Assessment Tasks in English, Social Studies, Math, and Science as well as take and pass the ELA/Common Core Regents exams to meet graduation requirements. This is highlighted in our school’s Theory of Action that states In order to ensure that students receive the appropriate services they need to be successful, we engage in constant monitoring of attendance and academic performance, and in providing appropriate academic and social interventions. Chronic absentees are a a key focus for all members of our learning community with attendance data being shared in Family Groups, our Advisory support system. Forsyth Satellite is part of a School Improvement Grants awarded by the U.S. Department of Education. Through the grant we are partnered with New York City Outward Bound (NYCOB). NYCOB provides instructional support and coaching. NYCOB School Designers work with our teachers on developing curriculum and instructional instructional practices that set high standards, actively engage students intellectual, build critical thinking skills as well as being inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. In school year 2018-2109 Forsyth will be partnered with CAMBA for the NYC Deparment of Education Learning To Work (LTW) initiative. The goal of LTW is to assist students in overcoming obstacles that impede their progress toward a high school diploma and lead them toward rewarding employment and educational experiences after graduation. LTW offers academic and student support, career and educational exploration, work preparation, skills development, and internships. In addition to LTW Forsyth will participation in the College Access for All initiative. The program is designed to develop Forysth Satellite's capacity to deliver high-quality college and career planning and significantly raise the numbers of students who graduate ready for post secondary education. Demographics : To date, 196 students are enrolled; 54.5% of students are Hispanic; 41% of students are Black; 5% are White, Asian or Native American. All classes are heterogeneous. While our school draws students from all parts of the city, our population comes largely from economically disadvantaged areas in Staten Island, the Lower East Side, East New York, Bedford-Stuyvesant, Harlem, Flatbush and the South Bronx. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our current student population includes 7% ELL students and 26% students with disabilities. Needs specific to the ELL population include English language acquisition while simultaneously learning content. They need support around passing the NYSESLAT exam and rapidly building academic reading and writing skills toward PBAT preparation. SWDs have specific programming needs as most need at least some of their instruction delivered in an ICT setting with the rest getting related services support. Our SWDs also need support building their academic reading and writing skills in 0  preparation for PBAT presentations. These students often need extra support in the skills associated with PBAT success including independent research and time management. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. This past school year the element of the Framework for Great Schools that the school made the most progress over the past year was Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. For next year, rigorous instruction, and collaborative teachers will be the two key areas from the Framework for Great Schools that will be our focus. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 01M458 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 203 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 3 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 15 11 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 82.8% % Reduced Lunch 7.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 59.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.67 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 54% 14% 14.9% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A YES No N/A 56 39 58.7% 3.0% 28.1% 34.5% 0.5% 1.0% 2 0% 5.4 N/A N/A 41% 11% 48.1% 1% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In reviewing our most recent 2017-2018 Quality Review report, it was noted that "Students were unevenly engaged in classroom discussions" By increases student choice in topics, texts and tasks students will feel greater ownership over their learning and as a result increase student engagement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, 100% of teachers will have attended school-based professional development and will have implemented greater student choice in topics, texts and/or tasks. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Learning for entire staff on EL practices that support building student choice into units and tasks as they are planned. Whole Staff Aug School designer Whole Staff Sep-Jan Administration Administration Professional Learning for specific staff members based on need on finding examples of high quality, choice-embedded tasks and resources and the pedagogy around supporting independent student work. Targeted teacher teams set goals for implementing the agreed upon qualities of tasks and units that include student choice Teacher teams Teachers meet monthly in discipline teams to share data, best practices, strategies, and progress toward goals in PL implementation Teacher teams School designer Oct Administration Teachers Nov-Jun Administration Teachers School Designer Teachers share progress and explain rationale of embedding student choice in the curriculum Whole staff will re-evaluate the effectiveness of the PL initiative in January and the PL team will share the cycle of PL sessions for the spring term Teachers Oct-Jun Administration Parents Teachers Whole Staff Jan Administration PL Team School Designer 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Exploration of the student choice aspect of course work will be addressed in all student-led conferences, at curriculum night, parent-teacher conferences, and at family engagement meetings, and through email and text communication channels. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 4  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Resources will be leveraged to provide for professional development from NYCOB school designer during staff development sessions  Per diem/prep coverage for PD related to Intervisitations (at FSA, Consortium schools, other transfer schools) ● Professional instructional materials to support lesson design and assessment during the school day ● Supplementary professional resources to support pedagogical growth ● Per diem costs associated with PD for teacher attendance at workshops/trainings/conferences by NYCDOE, New York State Performance Standards Consortium, Facing History and Ourselves, Literacy Design Collaborative, Coalition of Essential Schools, Innovative Schools Network, Teachers College at Columbia, My Library NYC Program Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By December 2018, 100% of our teachers will have participated in professional learning around how to use tasks and texts that include the opportunity for student choice  By November 2018, 100% of teachers will have set goals around implementing tasks and units that involve student choice in tasks and/or texts  By January 2019, evidence of student choice present in 80% of PBAT panel presentations Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Framework for Teaching Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on information gathered from one-on-one interviews conducted by administration with family group advisers, it was agreed that family group advisers need more support around tracking student progress and student post secondary planning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of family advisers will have an accurate tracking system to monitor each family group member's progress towards graduation. In addition, a protocol for family group advisers will be created and implemented to ensure that each student has a post secondary plan. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration and staff create new vision and scope for Family Group in terms of agreeing upon a system for tracking student progress toward graduation FG Committee Aug Administration Guidance Team School faculty will set benchmarks for implementation in using the agreed upon system for tracking student progress toward graduation Whole Staff Sept Administration School will administer student survey in Family Group in order to be responsive based on student needs and interests Teachers Sept & Jan Administration Teachers Walkthroughs of Family Group to monitor progress Whole Staff Sept-June Administration Professional Learning sessions reflecting on current lessons and writing/adaption/adopting new lessons for Family Group Whole Staff Sept-June Administration Guidance Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Family Group Adviser will share the system for tracking student progress toward graduation with parents at SLCs and once a trimester via phone call or electronically. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● MOSL funds to provide PD on unit design that includes alignment to CCLS, rigor, UDL, Differentiation, assessment design and grading, cultural relevant/responsive pedagogy 7  ● Per diem/prep coverage for PD related to Intervisitations (at FSA, Consortium schools, other transfer schools) ● CCLS instructional and assessment materials ● Professional instructional materials to support lesson design and assessment during the school day ● Supplementary professional resources to support pedagogical growth ● Per diem costs associated with PD for teacher attendance at workshops/trainings/conferences by NYCDOE, New York State Performance Standards Consortium, Facing History and Ourselves, Teachers College at Columbia, New York City Outward Bound Schools. ● Datacation/Skedula: Purchase of student information system software for monitoring student progress and performance, sharing of student data and outreach for students/parents. ● Funds to support services provided by Henry Street Settlement, University Settlement. ● Funds to support consultants, speakers, field trips to help students to understand relevance and importance of what they are learning in classes. ● Funds to support college trips within New York State (SUNY and Private schools). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 80% of students surveyed will accurately convey their progress toward graduation. By March 2019, 80% of families surveyed at SLCs will accurately convey their child's status in progress toward graduation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student and family survey responses Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In reviewing our most recent school survey, we have made extraordinary gains in teacher collaboration over the past year. We voted in a new SBO schedule which allowed for much more productive collaboration to occur. While these gains are heartening, our score on the most recent Quality Review, still stands at Developing for teacher collaboration, in which it states, "the consistency which teams meet and the uneven use of inquiry approach did not yield ongoing impact on improving teacher practice or student performance." Therefore, after discussing this as a school community, this year we are working to strengthen and systematize how teachers collaborate through a formal intervisitation process. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teacher teams will have participated in an intervisitation using an agreed upon protocol aligned instructional goals for the 2018-1019 school year 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? New York City Outward Bound Schools in collaboration with Forsyth's school leadership will design and facilitate professional development regarding intervisitation protocols and procedures. All teachers with special attention to SWDs and ELLs July - Sept Administration The New York Performance Standards Consortium will provide professional learning for teachers including discipline-specific workshops, intervisitations, and moderation studies focused on analyzing tasks and student work. School leaders and NYCOB consultant will create a year long course guiding faculty through critical thinking readings and discussions to build a shared understanding of concepts and terms. Ongoing support and feedback provided by colleagues at PL sessions using protocols for professional learning groups All teachers July - June Consortium presenters Consortium Presenters All teachers Sept-Oct PL Committee Administration Sept - June Teachers Support Staff Administration All teachers will special attention to target groups of students especially SWDs and ELLs Content specific planning time embedded in professional time All teachers Sept-June PL Committee Attend principal share fairs led by the Office of the Superintendent that highlight best practices in content specific areas Administration Oct-May Superintendent's Team Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Each department will share their intervisitation progress and learning via an inquiry newsletter. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 0  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● MOSL funds to provide PD on unit design that includes alignment to CCLS, rigor, UDL, Differentiation, assessment design and grading, cultural relevant/responsive pedagogy ● Per diem/prep coverage for PD related to Intervisitations (at FSA, Consortium schools, other transfer schools) ● CCLS instructional and assessment materials ● Professional instructional materials to support lesson design and assessment during the school day ● Supplementary professional resources to support pedagogical growth ● Per diem costs associated with PD for teacher attendance at workshops/trainings/conferences by NYCDOE, New York State Performance Standards Consortium, Facing History and Ourselves, Literacy Design Collaborative, Coalition of Essential Schools, Innovative Schools Network, Teachers College at Columbia, My Library NYC Program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 75% of teacher teams will have participated in intervisitations Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Framework for Teaching Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school has made great strides in improving the relationship between staff and administration this past year. We scored between 95-100% positive on all questions related to the quality of leadership here at Forsyth Satellite. To build on our successes and goals toward a more inclusive leadership style, this year, we are working to spread important decision making and school governance issues beyond the administration to a steering committee. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By September 2019, Forsyth Satellite Academy will institute systems and structures to support school Steering Committee and hold monthly meetings to increase collaborative leadership and decision making. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Plan and share observation rationale and schedule according to teacher selections in ADVANCE Whole staff Sept Administration Continue to support effective practices established this year to create and preserve feeling of trust and support including weekly newsletter, classroom visits, and regular check-ins with teachers Meet with leadership cohort of NYCOB and attend principals' conferences held by the Office of the Superintendent to share and learn best practices in educational leadership Whole Staff Sept-June Administration UFT Chapter Chair Administration Sept-June NYCOB Superintendent's office Analyze observations to determine trends and decide on next steps Administration Oct-May Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families and school community will receive regular updates from the Steering Committee at SLT meetings, parent meetings, via school written updates and newsletters. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SBO vote to better align school daily and cycle schedule to established and shared set of beliefs about how students learn best. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 3  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Analysis of teacher feedback during post-observation discussions will reveal frequency and familiarity of administration of all teacher classrooms by winter 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC School Survey Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We had an increase of 23% of parents responding to the School Quality Survey this year. We would like to increase this percentage and we think the means to doing so is getting more families actively involved during the school year so that they can truly feel like partners in their child's education. Only 72% of the parents who responded said that they were likely to attend a general school meeting or attend a school event. Based on this data, we are providing more support for parents and students to complete the school survey. We are increasing the number of opportunities for parent involvement. We are including parent workshops around understanding young adulthood development, Post Traumatic Stress, and other areas the will increase teacher understanding of the social emotional needs of our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of parents who attend events will increase by 5% from the previous year. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent Coordinator will meeting with administration and Community Coordinator to develop a plan and calendar for family events for the year PC will meet with a focus group of parents along with families who come to the school to determine what meetings / plans will work best within the community PC will hold various parent informational meetings in collaboration with the community coordinator on post secondary readiness and options and supporting students toward graduation along with trainings on how to use and access school data sharing systems Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Families July - August Guidance Staff Families July - Oct Guidance Staff Administration Families Sept - June Guidance Staff In January, we will revisit the plans and calendar and determine if the new plan of action is working Guidance staff Jan Admin Guidance Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Funds for general office supplies and postage for parent and student mailings. ● Funding for refreshment at workshops and trainings for parents and students. ● Set aside funds for SLT stipend. ● Per session for prep period coverage for translation and interpretation services. ● Funds to support Skedula use to communicate with families 6  ● Metrocards to assist parents with transportation costs for attending school events and intervention conferences. ● Funds for college waivers and other college related costs for families who cannot afford to pay them. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. School will monitor the results of student surveys administered throughout the year in each cycle and the post secondary plans and outcomes for graduating students while making key alliances with family members. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC School Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher recommendations based on analysis of ELA and Common Core Regents data, ELA PBAT completion and pass scores; Assistant Principal and Social Worker recommendations, IEPs and NYSESLAT data Teacher recommendations based on analysis of PBAT data; Assistant Principal and Social Worker recommendations, IEPs Science Teacher recommendations based on analysis of Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Focus on command of evidence from text: paired passages; Use of evidence from sources to inform and make an argument and counter argument through close reading; Building Academic Vocabulary; Development of reading, writing, speaking and listening skills. Use of instructional focus - the seven Learning to Learn literacy skills are incorporated in lessons. Developing a deep understanding of mathematical concepts through fluency and application. Math teachers engage students in inquiry based projects in preparation for completion of Math PBAT. Science teachers facilitate in class labs and use technology Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) AIS Small Group Tutoring After School AIS Small Group Tutoring After School AIS Small Group Tutoring After School 8 PBAT data; Assistant Principal and Social Worker recommendations, IEPs Social Studies Teacher recommendations based on analysis of PBAT data; Assistant Principal and Social Worker recommendations, IEPs At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Family Group Advisor referrals, Guidance Counselor /Social Worker Referrals, Attendance Team Recommendations to provide students with opportunities to conduct experiments and research. Students use school’s Instructional Focus - Learning to Learn Literacy skills and observation. Science teachers focus on how to engage students in developing reading, writing, speaking and listening skills. Using text based evidence from sources to inform or make an argument and develop skills in research .Teachers incorporate the seven Learning to Learn Literacy skills in lessons and use content that is relevant to students’ life experiences. The Social Worker and Guidance Counselor provide services aligned to student needs. Some topics include planning for and transition after high school, stress management, improving study habits, building positive relationships, safer sex practices, time management, conflict resolution etc . AIS Small Group Tutoring After School During the school day Individual and small group counseling, Family Group/Advisory workshops 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Satellite Forsyth has a total of 16 documented students in Temporary Housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Upon entering Forsyth Satellite Academy Students in temporary housing meet individually with our social worker who conducts a needs assessment. Together the social worker creates an action plan that is designed to meet the needs of the individual student. In addition, the student receives a school supply package, that includes a book bag, pens, pencils, notebooks and other essential school supplies. Along with school supplies the student is provided with a Health care supply package that includes all essential health care products. Students may also receive two-fare metro cards for out of school travel, as well as food if needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  All new hires are screened by a hiring committee which includes when possible a demo lesson. Feedback from teachers, and students on demo lessons is collected and used to inform hiring decisions.  As a member of the Consortium for Performance Based Assessment, we use this professional network to recruit teachers that are proficient in project and inquiry based learning.  A relationship with Math for America helps us to identify highly qualified candidates in Math and Science.  We utilize school videos, the school’s website, banners and school pamphlets to inform potential candidates at hiring fairs.  New teachers are supported with monthly meetings with the Principal and an open door policy to address issues.  Professional Development that is strategically designed to build a collaborative and improve teacher retention.  A detailed staff handbook and PBAT handbook orients new staff to the community norms, expectations and academic policy.  Monthly informal conversations with the UFT Chapter Leader to informally address concerns raised in the community 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  As an Associate School of New York City Outward Bound, teachers are provide professional development based on the teaching practices an strategies that are directly aligned to the Common Core State Standards. 2   All Staff members are trained in the use of Skedula, Forsyth Satellite Academy's online grading system. Understanding of Skedula allows all staff to share resources with students online as well as provided them support in their academic progress.  All Staff members are trained GoogleDocs and Google Classroom to collaborate professionally as well as to share documents with students for revision/editing.  Mentor support for Principal from effective leaders in the field of education and leadership.  MOSL/MOTP training through the Office of Teacher Effectiveness /Development and Consortium.  Instructional Support provided by Literacy Design Collaborative, Facing History and Ourselves and Achievement Coach(es). Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. As a member of the New York Performance Standards Consortium, our school uses PBATS as assessments of student achievement. Teachers design appropriate interim and summative assessments based on their content which is vetted by Administration for rigor and CCLS alignment. In Teacher Teams, the “task” is also reviewed and feedback is provided for revision or clarity as needed, before distribution to students. After administration has reviewed/provided 3  feedback on the task, Teacher Teams review samples of student work for potential modification to the task so students will have clarity on what they are expected to know and do to be successful on the task. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 103,141.00 0 0 0 1,782,770.00 x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) See section 5a, c, dparts 3a See section 5b & e parts 3a 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 4   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Forsythe Satellite Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Forsyth Satellite Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 6  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSAState accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 7  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Forsyth Satellite Academy ,[School name], in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 8  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 9  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with theEvery Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 0  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 1  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 01 School Name Forsyth Satellite Academy Borough Manhattan School Number 458 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Brady Smith Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Katherine Morganegg Teacher/Subject Area Ken Stein Teacher/Subject Area Zalykha Mokim Related-Service Provider Tishania Louallen Superintendent Kathy Rehfiled-Pelles Assistant Principal Patrick Reimer Coach type here School Counselor Tishania Louallen Parent Eileen Villanueva Parent Coordinator Jenny Jackson Field Support Center Staff Member Jocelyn Santana Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 210 3 Total number of ELLs 19 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.05%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Forsyth Satellite Academy is a transfer school that is a member of the Performance Standards Consortium. As such, we are a literacy intensive school and we evaluate our ELL applicants in the same manner as our non-ELL students. Applicants submit a writing sample and complete a reading comprehension exercise. The assessment is a baseline NYC ELA Performance Assessment for MOSL. For ELL applicants, this diagnostic is assessed by the ESL teacher. In addition to the diagnostic exam, we review their ELA scores, NYSESLT scores and credit accumulation in English courses. From this data, we determine how to program accepted ELL students. This includes programming for additional supports such as additional ELA courses or writing labs. In the past year, we enrolled 11 ELL students of which only 27% had a NYSELSAT performance level and 0% had passed a ELA Regents at their previous school(s). Going forward, the ESL teacher will co-teach a literacy lab to prepare ELLs for the June administration of the ELA Regents. The ESL teacher will also co-teach PBAT courses to support students in completing the required assessments in the core areas of Math, Science, ELA and Social Studies. 4  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Co-teaching schedule. Co-planning and departmental time. Circular 6. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Forsyth Satellite Academy is a small transfer school. The success of our ELL program is based on students' ability to accumulate credits, pass required State assessments in their second language and eventually earn a high school diploma. As a member of the Consortium, Forsyth Satellite students complete performance based assessment tasks in English, Math, Science and Social Studies. The main component of these tasks require students to write a 8-10 page paper that cites evidence from primary and secondary sources to support a thesis or explain a concept. ELL students that successfully complete theses tasks demonstrate mastery of CCR 11-12 literacy standards. This includes data from Regents exams, PBAT pass rates and scores on the CUNY intake assessment. We also examine our compliance with federal, state and city mandates and ability to maintain accurate student records. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Regular review of student progress toward graduation occurs in advisory and in ELL departmental meetings. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] NA 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Due to the nature of our students, it is often difficult to obtain a multi-year view of NYSELSAT data. In fact, the 2012 -2013 administration is the most recent score for 60% of our population. A review of this data suggests that school attendance is a major concern for our ELLs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Students are programmed into courses that are developmentally appropriate and allow additional opportunities to demonstrate mastery. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We strive to provide the best learning environment for all of our students, therefore, we have a unique organizational and program model for the delivery of instruction. Our courses are departmentalized, but there is common collaboration across the disciplines. All classes have a heterogeneous mix of grade levels and student abilities. We provide push in/ pull out and self-contained services for our ELL and SPED students. This year, the ELL students are provided with n integrated model that provides support in the core academic classes. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 5  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Because our current ELL students are at least the intermediate level, they can receive English only instruction with native language support. The program of the certified ENL teacher provides the opportunity for students to receive 280 minutes per week in core academic courses. The ENL teacher then provides an additional 180 minutes of ENL support through after-school tutoring. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content areas are delivered in English only using the push-in/pull out method or self contained classes. The curriculum for the courses are aligned to the CCLS with an emphasis on literacy. In these classes, native language is supported via translated texts, alternate video/audio clips and the use of dictionaries. The ELL students are expected to master the same CCLS skill objectives of a course as their non-ELL peers. The approach to mastery is modified for the ELL students using UDL, scaffolding and literacy building strategies. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We do not evaluate ELLs in their native languages. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We ensure all teachers aware of the special literacy needs of each ELL student to differentiate their lessons in support of the students. Each month, the ENL teacher spotlights specific ENL strategies that content teachers can use when working with ELL students. This includes but is not limited to home language dictionaries, graphic organizers, sentence stems/starters, modified/ chunked information texts and transcripts of videos. For assessments, ELL students are provided with time and half, reading and re-reading of instructions and home language dictionaries. Additionally, we use a diagnostic tool to evaluate their current abilities in ELA and math. With this data, we create a specialized graduation plan that provides additional support in areas of weakness. As a free standing ENL program, we can provide the mandated minutes of ENL instruction for entering, emerging and transitioning students via course scheduling and an integrated model. Once they have received an expanding rating on the NYSESLAT and a 65 or higher on the ELA Regents, we continue to provide the mandated time of ENL instruction though the two year transitional period. This entire sequence requires a minimum of three years, therefore, our instructional program is the same for all ELL groups. It is estimated that a student, ELL or non-ELL remains in our community for less than three years. The differentiation of instruction occurs during their content courses and sessions with the ENL teacher. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers at Forsyth Satellite Academy write CCLS aligned curricula for their courses that are appropriate for 9-12 grade students. Using Universal Design for Learning Strategies, the teachers provided modifications of the texts and classroom readers to promote ELL language acceleration to the general text. Additionally, each department has an instructional lead that researches strategies that would be useful for students based on an analysis of their student work. In the past, this has included the translation of texts, providing written transcripts of videos and extended time for tasks. Students that classified as ELL-SWDs receive all services that are mandated by their IEPs and ENL instructional program. 6  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We like to program our students in the least restrictive setting for our ELLs with disabilities. As such, we offer ICT classes in each of the core academic areas as well as SETTS. The school makes every effort to ensure that PBAT classes have two teachers to support ELL-SWDs in the writing process. We also schedule the courses during periods to maximize attendance and limit class size which typically falls between the hours of 9:45am and 12:00pm. Also, we use google docs to maintain goal sheets for all IEP students. All staff members have access to these documents and can post their concerns and/or recommendations for these students. The IEP writer takes these recommendations to create meaningful goals for the students which could include changing IEP models. Teachers are provided with training on Skedula and SESIS to access student IEPs and use this information to write their lessons and course goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Students receive interventions to support their second language and content learning. Native language support is included in the form of translation, staff who speak their native language, and the use of technology. School-wide, we offer after/before school individual and small-group tutoring. In departments, there are specific interventions such as brainpop that are utilized to help ELL students access the text and content specific vocabulary. Lastly, we recognize that project based learning works very well for out ELL-SWDs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year, we will be introducing an integrated freestanding ENL program. Each cycle, the ENL teacher will co-teach core academic classes for ELL students. This is aligned to the new NYS CR Part 154 licensing requirements. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. The ELLS in our community are programmed in the same manner as non-ELL students. ELL students are able to participate in all classes and programs offered at the school. We recruit student participation through fliers, bulletin boards and in Family Groups. A licensed pedagogue provides after-school tutoring in the 4 core academic disciplines and the ENL teacher is available for additional literacy support. In the past, ELL students have actively participated on Student Leadership, the Achieve Now Program and our YBI Institute with the TJ Maxx companies. All ELL students have access to all clubs and programs we offer to our students 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. As a project based learning program, we use many sources of instructional technology to aid our students. This includes, but is not limited to: Geometer's Sketchpad, Googledocs, laptops, vernier sensors, Adobe Creative Suite, and video/audio aids. There is also a Smartboard in every classroom for interactive demonstrations of content. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is provided through the online classes and staff members that speak Spanish and Haitian-Creole. WE also have classroom libraries that make use of supplemental resources such as translated documents and dictionaries. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Since the majority of our students are over 17 and are over-aged/under-credited, we track students based on their progress towards graduation. Our ELL support services are designed to provide students with the reading and writing skills to successfully present a PBAT and pass the ELA Regents. To make their services and supports, the ENL teacher reviews their exam history in ATS and their grades in previous humanities courses. The ENL teacher also reviews the intake diagnostic exam 7  with the ELA department to devise possible supports. This data is shared with other academic teachers to plan for differentiation in their lesson plans. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? As a project based learning program, we use many sources of instructional technology to aid our students. This includes, but is not limited to: Geometer's Sketchpad, Googledocs, laptops, vernier sensors, Adobe Creative Suite, and video/audio aids. There is also a Smartboard in every classroom for interactive demonstrations of content. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We conduct student intake throughout the school year. However, as a transfer school, we do not have access to students records before enrollment. After enrollment, the student's records are reviewed by the programming team, the ESL teacher and IEP team (if necessary). A graduation plan is created for the student which is reviewed with the student and parent with the Advisor. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All school personnel including support staff actively participate in the school's weekly 60 minute Professional Development sessions that are grounded in providing effective classroom instruction for all learners. Specifically, we are focusing on designing coherent instruction, increasing student participation through questioning / discussion and assessment. Teachers will also receive Professional Development through participation in the Literacy Design Institute, The Teacher Leadership Program and series provided by the NYCDOE Borough Affinity Group. The LDC Team consists of the Principal, 2 ELA teachers, SWD teacher, 1 Social Studies teacher, 1 Science teacher, and 2 ENL teachers. The TLP team consists of the Assistant Principal, SWD teacher, ENL teacher, Science teacher and ELA teacher. The Social Worker receives Professional Development to support the socio-emotional development of ELLs through trainings provided by the NYCDOE Office of Wellness and OYSD. We do not staff a Speech Therapist or Guidance Counselor. The ENL teacher and at least one teacher of ELLs in each core acdemic area is a participant on the LDC Team. LDC is a national community of educators providing a teacher-designed and research-proven framework, online tools, and resources for creating literacy-rich assignments and courses across content areas that are CCLS aligned. LDC offers teachers, coaches, and leaders an instructional design system for developing students’ literacy skills to prepare them for the demands of college and career. LDC does not provide “off-the-shelf” curriculum units or lesson plans. Instead, LDC empowers teachers to build students’ literacy skills and understanding of science, history, literature, and other important academic content through meaningful reading and writing assignments that are aligned to College and Career Readiness Standards (CCRS). 8  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. FSA only enroll students that have attempted at least one year of high school in another program. As such, we generally must support all students in transitioning to an alternative program. To support students' transition, each student is paired with a FAmily Group that will anchor their academic and /socio-emotional support throughout their enrollment in our school. Additionally, we have an experienced Social Worker that provides individual and group counseling for SWDs and non-SWDs. We are planning to hire a full-time Guidance Counselor to support students in devising a plan for after high school. Our certified ENL teacher receives over 50 hours of professional development over the course of the school year. This is obtained via PD offered by the NYCDOE, consultants and webcasts/webinars. The minimum 7.5 hours of mandated ELL training for all staff is provided during the weekly collaborative team meetings. The workshops provide strategies , methodologies and new research in teaching ELLs. The agendas, sign-in sheets and minutes of all PD sessions are maintained in the Principal's Office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides two opportunities for parents to discuss the goals of the program, progress and development with staff. In December, the meeting is offered as a day meeting and then again as an evening session in February. In this manner, we can accommodate the diverse parent schedules. For the December meeting, staff is available to provide translation in Spanish and Haitian-Creole. Spanish speaking staff are available to translate for the February meeting. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. FSA maintains an open-door policy and parents are encouraged to arrange appointments with teachers and advisors at any time. Additionally, the Social Worker and Parent Coordinator plans monthly parent sessions for special student populations including ELLs that address their specific concerns. They plan parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. She also maintains log of events and activities planned for parents each month and files a report with the central office. The Parent Coordinator is Bilingual and can provide translation services as necessary at the meetings. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Brady Smith, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Forsyth Satellite Academy School DBN: 01M458 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Brady Smith Title Principal Patrick Reimer Assistant Principal Sean Nazario Parent Coordinator Katherine Morganegg ENL/Bilingual Teacher Elieen Villanueva Parent Ken Stein/History Teacher/Subject Area Matt Toscano Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Tishania Louallen School Counselor Kathy Rehfield-Pelles Jocelyn Santana Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ELL Services Administrator Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 7/23/17 7/23/17 7/23/17 7/23/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 7/23/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 01M458 School Name: Forsyth Satellite Academy Superintendent: Kathy Pelles The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parental involvement is a major component of Forsyth Satellite Academy's instructional program. From the parent orientation during their intake process to the parent meetings for graduating seniors, interventions as well as Parent Teacher Conferences. Parents are active participants in their child's journey at our school. As such, our written translation and oral interpretation needs are great. We ask that every student in our community complete the Home Language Survey and we update this information in ATS. We also request Emergency Contact Cards every year from students and compare/update in ATS. We then run the RHLA report to determine our needs for the school year. Based on the information, we identify the in-house staff that can provide these services. The languages that are not covered by in-house staff, we utilize the written translation services provided by word processing software for documents. We request oral interpretation services provided by the NYCDOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The results of the Home Language Survey are: Bengali - 1 (.60%), Cantonese - 1 (.60%), English - 98 (59.04%), French - 1 (.60%), French-Khmer - 1(.60%), Haitian Creole -1(.60%), Japanese -1(.60%), Niger-Congo - 1(.60%), Spanish - 60 (36.14%). 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The documents our school typically disseminates throughout the year that require translation when they are distributed to families are as follows: Student/Parent Handbook, newsletters, parent-teacher conference announcements and NYS Testing dates, after school program announcements. 3  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school The formal face-to-face meetings that our school will typically have throughout the school years are as follows: Parent-Teacher conferences, IEP meetings, Student Interventions, Orientation, un-announced walk-in visits by parents. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? On-site for Spanish. Via Translation Unit for all other languages. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School Messenger Robo-calls in all languages identified in the Home Language Survey. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff training on September 8, 2017. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We do not have an uncovered language in which more than 10% of our parents require translation and interpretation services. For the covered languages, we have signs in the Principal's and Student/Parent office. We provide a link to parents via the announcements webpage to the NYCDOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit. The school's safely plan does outline procedures for families requiring language services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 4  Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Forsyth Satellite Academy will have surveys in place for parents on the quality and availability of our translation services. 5 
