 02M459 School Name: MANHATTAN INTERNATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL Principal: GLADYS RODRIGUEZ   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Manhattan International HS 310200011459 School Number (DBN): 02M459 9 - 12 317 East 67 Street New York, New York 10065 (212) 517-6728 Phone Number: (212) 517-7147 Fax: Gladys Dorilda Rodriguez grodriguez2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Gladys Dorilda Rodriguez Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Bonnie MacSaveny Prem Gurung Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Moses Ahn Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Yusup Tugutu Nayeli Ataupillco Sahara Bamba Candy Halikas Geographical District: 02 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Kathy Rehfield-Pelles Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, room 508 Brooklyn, NY 11201 krehfield@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 923-5181 Phone Number: (718) 923-5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Affinity Group Alexandra Anormaliza FSC: Executive Director: 131 Livingston St., Room 606, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718)935-5618 Phone Number: (718)935-5941 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Gladys Dorilda Rodriguez Bonnie MacSaveny Nina Belenozova James Barkley Delly Garcia Mirna Castro Anxhela Zhuka Candy Halikas Jose Sarante Lorena Quiroga Moses Ahn Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Rep / YMCA Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nina Kogut-Akkum Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school mission statement reads as follows: The mission of The Manhattan International High School is to develop in each of our new learners of English the linguistic, cognitive and cultural skills necessary for informed and creative participation in our diverse society.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Manhattan International High School is one of 27 International High schools represented by the Internationals Network for Public Schools. We are also part of the New York State Performance Based Standards Consortium of schools who are permitted to graduate our students based on Performance Based Assessments / Portfolio, as an alternative to basing graduation requirements on Regents exam scores. These unique qualities of our school are reflected in our CEP. We have improved our four year graduation rate dramatically over the past four years (74% Class of 2017) and we hope to continue this trend. Our six year graduation rate of 90% indicates that we are successfully graduating the majority of our students. Research on the ELL population shows that it generally takes students 5-7 years to become proficient in academic English, which reflects that we have demonstrated expertise in bringing our mission to life. For the last 4 academic school years, we have participated in three innovative DOE initiatives. 1. Progressive Redesign Opportunity Schools for Excellence (PROSE), which allows for flexibility in scheduling to ensure best practices for meeting the needs of our diverse student population and includes teacher evaluation and student assessment that supports our teaching and student learning models. 2. Master Collaborative (previously known as Digital Ready), which supports our integration of arts, technology and Mastery Based Learning into students' academic lives. 3. Software Engineering Program (SEP) / Computer Science for All - This program supports the NYC DOE’s commitment to provide meaningful, high-quality computer science education at each grade level. It also partners us with 42 organizations around New York City and allows us to offer our students an authentic experience in professional work environments. We completed our first year and are proud to report that all of our 9th graders received computer science classes and this year we will expand the program to offer computer science to 10th and 11th graders as well. In addition, we are one of 113 schools across the country to receive an Apple ConnectEd Grant, which provides 1:1 iPad technology and professional development support from Apple. We are a Title l school serving new immigrants who are English language learners who are traditionally underrepresented in higher education. We believe that this program will increase access and promote engagement and academic achievement. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school is unique because it serves newcomer immigrant students, a special student population who is classified as English Language Learners (ELLs). Our students speak 44 languages and arrive from 52 countries presenting amazing opportunities, as well as special challenges. 39% percent of our students are classified as Students with Limited or Interrupted Formal Education (SLIFE). Additionally, a great majority of our students qualify for free school lunch which means they live at or below the poverty level. As such, our students needs include:  Basic literacy skills in both in English and in the student's native language,  Numeracy skills  Academic English language vocabulary and skills   Assistance in meeting basic personal and family needs such as; housing, medical care, employment, legal Socio-emotional supports that address the immigrant experience as well as personal traumas matters 0  Translation services for a school records and communicating with parents 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our 2016-17 School Quality Snapshot reflects excellence in the areas of Rigorous Instruction (86%-Survey), Collaborative Teaching (94%-Survey), Effective School Leadership (97%-Survey), Strong Family Community Ties (90%-Survey) and Trust (96%-Survey). For this school year, our focus within the Framework for Great Schools will be to further develop a supportive school environment by strengthening interventions to promote the socio-emotional well-being of our students and student leadership. Our team has continued training with a school specific coach from The Morning Side Center to learn restorative practices for use within our school community. During this second year of this initiative we were able to expand restorative practices into our classroom setting by holding restorative classroom circles for socio-emotional support and by holding student training for restorative practices with our student government group, as we are working towards this student team being able to mediate peer conflicts in the near future. Furthermore, we held successful personal development workshops for our staff in the Fall and Spring semesters this the school year which allowed us to reflect on best practices and strategies for further building student/teacher relationships. During our last Quality Review, we were designated as “Well Developed” in all indicators. We met our goals from our CEP from 2016-2017 and are pursuing next steps towards continuous improvement. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M459 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 337 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 81.0% % Reduced Lunch 68.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 53.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 13.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.08 5% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 75% 0% 72.2% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A N/A N/A 87.5% 3.3% 2.7% 14.8% 17.5% 0.3% 0 25% 5.1 N/A N/A 3% 0% 90.0% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Our 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot reflects excellence in the areas of Rigorous Instruction (86%).During our last Quality Review, we were designated as “Well Developed” in this element. 88% of our students indicate that they know what their teachers want them to learn in class as compared to a citywide average of 79%. 78% of teachers say that students built on each other’s ideas during class discussions compared to a citywide average of 64%. Last but not least, 77% of students say that they learn a lot from feedback on their work compared to a citywide average of 64%. 2. The priority need that will be addressed in the goal and action plan will demonstrate progress towards reaching grade level benchmarks and completing required Graduation Portfolio projects in Math and Science with a Competent or higher beginning in eleventh grade. We will prepare students with hands-on projects and practice presentation at every grade level and in every class, serving to prepare them for graduation level projects aligned to the New York State Performance Standards Consortium rubric. The mediums for this work will be our weekly team meetings where teachers meet in grade level teams as well as discipline teams to align both grade level and content specific outcomes for performance based assessments and professional development with the Internationals Network for Public Schools (INPS) and the New York State Performance Standards Consortium. Our teachers participate in inter-visitations with other Internationals Network schools sponsored by INPS. As the teachers presented their Interdisciplinary project work in order to improve their own interdisciplinary units, they clarified how each project contributes to the goal of the larger unit. In addition we have restructured our schedule to allow for more use of Reading Plus and other targeted small group instruction based on student choice. We are aligning our use of mastery based grading, supported by JumpRope software, in order to keep the focus on identified and standards based outcomes for all academic content area. Finally, our continued work with our technology and arts partnerships increases engagement, supports interdisciplinary work and enriches classes at every grade level. All of these elements improve instruction and curriculum and will lead to stronger PBAT work for our Graduation Portfolio and oral presentations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 3  By June 2019, 84% of students school wide will show progress towards reaching grade level benchmarks and completing required Graduation Portfolio projects in math and science in eleventh grade with a Competent or higher. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). This year our year long senior mentoring program will be extended to include eleventh graders as the prepare PBATs in science and math. Every teacher mentors three or four seniors weekly to help them complete and prepare to present their portfolio work and will now take on three or four eleventh graders in addition. We expect this to increase the number of students on track with PBAT projects and oral presentations. Both Senior and eleventh grade teachers are communicating weekly about students who are not on track. Preparation for PBATs will:  Support students in the lowest third through the use of educational reading and math software programs: Reading Plus, Rosetta Stone, Learning Upgrade, Duolingo.  These programs allow teachers to diagnose with  precision and communicate with students and parents about areas for remediation. Student can work on targeted skills individually that will support overall success with project based work. In addition, with the information from Reading Plus, SIFE students are placed in three different after school groups based on need: English conversation class, instruction specific to Spanish speakers, or a reading/writing group.  These software programs can be utilized at home, thereby engaging family members in the work of school. Provide Professional Development for teachers from INPS and the New York State Performance Standards Consortium, geared towards differentiating for students with mixed abilities, inter-disciplinary work, mastery-based grading, strategies for ELLs. Because all of our students are ELLs, everything we do is targeted for this population. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 9-12th grade teachers, especially the Portfolio Coordinator, Portfolio Committee and Senior teacher team and eleventh grade science and math teachers. Partner Organizations, including INPS and the Consortium, and teachers All seniors and all Eleventh grade students These programs are used and available for all students, but we will target the lowest third of our students. We also hope to engage family members in these programs. Admin and teachers. Weekly mentoring begins the first week of school and will continue thorough June 2019. Regular assessment of both the program and needs of the students will occur in line with our marking periods. (Fall Term: November 2 and December 20, 2018 Spring Term: February 15, April 12, June 10, 2019) Assess students with Reading Plus and other software in September, ongoing assessments 5  and adjustments per marking periods. (Fall Term: November 2 and December 20, 2018 Spring Term: February 15, April 12, June 10, 2019) Provide engaging curriculum with assistance from partner programs: MCC Theatre, Strike Anywhere, Beam Center, Magic Box Productions, Reel Works, ScriptEd, the Family Cook. Students and teachers September - June Partner organizations and teachers. Teachers September - June Principal, teachers Parent Coordinator, parents, support team Partner organizations work with students at every grade level to increase engagement in classes and teach marketable skills (film making, coding, cooking). Partnering organizations provide internships for our students, as well as showcasing events for parents in the Spring. Use Jumprope grading software to support mastery-based assessment. The school will also provide training for parents in the use of Jumprope at home, allowing parental involvement and monitoring of their children in school at any time of day or week. Initial group training sessions already occurred for parent groups, but individual parent training is available to all parents through a private session with the Parent coordinator. Manhattan International will participate in Mastery Collaborative, offered through the Department of Education, in which professional development and interscholastic development will occur. Use PBAT tracking system to identify students in need of additional support. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 6  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Support Team, made up by two guidance counselors, social worker, paraprofessional, community assistant and the parent coordinator, will work on the following:  Parent trainings on the use of JumpRope / Mastery Based Learning (Fall and Spring terms), Preparing for College and Career Readiness(Fall and Spring terms), Tutoring and After School Opportunities, (Ongoing) Relationship Building with school(Ongoing), and Importance of Parental Involvement for Student Success (Fall and Spring semester), Restorative Justice (twice a year each)  Parents will be supported in their roles with our School Leadership Team (once a month) and our Coordinating Council (weekly) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Curriculum and staff development services will be purchased from Internationals Network for Public Schools (INPS).  Principal Meetings: Monthly, 9-12 and AP Meetings monthly, 9-12  Critical Friends meetings and dates monthly 1-3pm through the NYC Leadership Academy.  Purchase of Reading Plus, Learning Upgrade.  Volunteer time for after school SIFE groups, teacher per session for same.  Partner organizations are paid for in-class residencies and planning time.  Purchase of Jumprope software.  Supervisor per diem for after school activities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1.Ongoing reading levels (by grade) generated from Reading Plus, and used to track student progress. In February we will look at Reading Plus data to ensure that 84% of students have completed at least 40 SEE readers, indicating the mid-point benchmark and that the student is on track to meet the minimum of one grade level improvement by June. We will also examine, as part of the mid-point benchmark review of Reading Plus, increase in number of vocabulary words understood, increased fluency and improvement in reading comprehension and rate. This data will drive the number of times per week (currently set at two) that an individual needs to continue with Reading Plus to ensure the minimum gain of one grade level in June. 2.Use of new strategies monitored and evaluated through two yearly classroom observations and face-to-face feedback with teachers, formative assessment with students, plus intervisitations from colleagues. During mid-year conferences with teachers the focus will be on assessing student progress with PBAT projects. We will look at grade books to determine whether students are on track to meet our goal of 83% passing on PBAT projects. Each teacher mentors 3-4 seniors and will be adding 3-4 eleventh grade students in 2018-19, allotting a portion of the focus to be on reviewing support plans for those students. Senior teachers are currently providing weekly updates to mentors on 7  missing/incomplete PBAT projects and eleventh grade science and math teachers will do the same. This will continue through PBAT presentations and will allow ongoing tracking of progress. 3.Curriculum Share at mid-year and Structured Review of teacher work at year-end enables teachers and administrators to evaluate and give feedback on curriculum and student work. In February every teacher will participate in a Curriculum Share, recording what was shared and actionable next steps received as feedback. These documents will be reviewed by administrators to monitor progress with curriculum planning and Common Core alignment. The end of year teacher portfolios will include evidence of teacher and student work, observation documents, peer feedback and reflection. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Reading Plus reports, ATS scholarship reports, Jumprope reports, PBAT periodic assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. In our 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, 85% responded positively to questions about Supportive Environment, with 93% of students responding that they feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker room and cafeteria, and 90% of students saying that this school provides them with information about the college enrollment process. In our 2015-16 School Quality Snapshot, 83% responded positively to questions about Supportive Environment. Even though this percent exceeds the City’s 70% score, we recognized we needed to more deeply focus on this element. During the 2017-2018 school year, our focus specifically included developing a supportive school environment by strengthening interventions to promote the socio-emotional well-being of our students and creating greater opportunities for student leadership. 2. Our team has continued Restorative Justice trainings with a school specific coach from The Morning Side Center and successfully implemented the use of classroom circles to address academic, community and social issues thereby expanding on restorative practices in use within our school community. This involved training for both teachers and students. We were able to implement a restorative circle training structure for students and have student led circles around social issues and socio-emotional development as we plan to move to include peer mediation in the near future. We have followed that training with personal development workshops for our staff in the Fall and the Spring in 2017-2018 school year focused on building student/teacher relationships. 3. Our additional work on mentoring and college readiness will also support our efforts. This includes; exploring career options, preferences explorations personality tests, and reviewing NYS graduation requirements and learning about potential college choices. Participating in community events that promote college enrollment is also practiced. (College and the NY Mets, and French Generale Bank/BBBS). Counselors are collaborating daily as part of teacher teams, grades 9-12, and bringing standards-based, counseling curriculum into the classroom to ensure students understand how to stay on track for college and careers. We will also continue to offer our College Seminar Course, on site supported by CUNY Hunter College and offsite College Now classes at CUNY Hunter College, CUNY John Jay College and CUNY Hostos Community College. The 2017-18 school year showed:  More than 90% of seniors completed FAFSA and TAP  25 seniors completing Excelsior Scholarship for NYS public colleges  100% of juniors took the SAT in school. Free SAT prep classes offered by: Big Brother Big Sister, YMCA, and school teachers.  47% Students going to 4 year colleges.  85% of seniors enrolled in college. 9   All junior and senior students attending workshops held by representatives from SUNY and private college representatives.  All juniors were administered the SAT on SAT school day.  19 juniors and seniors receiving credit in College Now Program.  35 students received a College Now taught Introduction Seminar Course on our school site. Our continuation with the Mastery Collaborative initiative will also positively contribute to this area. We will continue to benefit from being on a campus with a LYFE Childcare Center, Mt. Sinai Adolescent Health Clinic and a YMCA office on site. We also work in close collaboration with Hunter College, John Jay, BMCC and Hostos College Now Programs. We believe that with a combination of a strong college readiness program including College Now ,Mentoring with Big Brother/ Big Sister, community service, and restorative practices, we will continue to improve in the area of Supportive Environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will raise participation in our programs that target student socio-emotional growth. There will be a 25% increase in student participation (up from 80 students to approximately 100) in the following activities: Targeted Tutoring, individual mentoring, Regents preparation, SAT preparation, Reading Plus program, YMCA programs, John Jay Upward Bound, Hunter College and John Jay College Now , Hunter Mouse Squad, Green Team, after school Restorative Justice Club, Big Brother/ Big Sister mentoring, and New York Cares community service. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Identify student need, track attendance and progress and evaluate efficacy of YMCA programs. Students Tutoring (for class, for basic literacy with Rosetta Stone - also available to parents, Reading Plus), mentoring, Regents and SAT prep, Big Brother/ Big Sister, New York Cares. Lowest third of students By the end of September student lists are collected based on diagnostics and teacher observation. September through June, once per week. Because all of our students are ELLs, we structure not just our school day around meeting the needs of all students, but we extend the day by offering supplemental tutoring, test prep, activities both on and off the campus, all helping to increase engagement resulting in improved student fluency and literacy. Participation in arts integrated curriculum. All students Throughout school year for all grades Deepening Restorative Justice practices with staff and students by including academic and social emotional learning circles in all classrooms. Academic circles will support classroom standards based curriculum. Social emotional learning circles will address themes such as: community building, values, identity, active listening, emotional regulation, conflict resolution and promote leadership skills. Services by our school's Support Team All teachers, all staff Summer 2018 - June 2019 All teachers, guidance counselor and administrators, teacher liaison to YMCA All teachers, partnering organizations, social worker, parent Coordinator Community based organizations and Partners (MCC Theatre,YMCA, New York Cares, Police Explorers, Strike Anywhere Theatre, Beam Center, Reel Works, Magic Box Productions, The Family Cook) Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility, teachers, coach, guidance counselors, social worker 1 (guidance counselors and clinical social worker) will align with these practices. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Support Team, made up by two guidance counselors, social worker, paraprofessional, community assistant and the parent coordinator, will work on the following:  Parent trainings on the use of JumpRope / Mastery Based Learning (Fall and Spring terms), Preparing for College and Career Readiness(Fall and Spring terms), Tutoring and After School Opportunities, (Ongoing) Relationship Building with school(Ongoing), and Importance of Parental Involvement for Student Success (Fall and Spring semester), Restorative Justice (twice a year each)  Parents will be supported in their roles with our School Leadership Team (once a month) and our Coordinating Council (weekly) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Programs and tutoring: 22 teachers, 2 administrators, 2 guidance counselor, 1 social worker weekly team meetings (45 minutes weekly) and Coordinating Council (1 hour weekly)  Regents prep: 2 teachers for 8 week sessions, 2 teacher per session hours per week. Targeted mentoring and tutoring: 21 teachers, February to June, 4 teacher per session hours per month  MCC Theatre artist works with 1 ninth grade English teacher on a weekly basis in 3 sections, October through June to integrate theatre arts into literacy intensive ELA curriculum  Other partners work with 1-2 teachers for 4-6 week units on a weekly basis with 4 sections October through June to integrate arts and technology instruction into core content classes for all students.  Newly created schedule designed to incorporate arts and technology partnerships and inter-disciplinary work.  Funding school partnerships with Beam Center, Strike Anywhere, Magic Box, Tribeca Films, Script Ed and Family Cook Productions, Mastery Collaborative are shared by school funds.  Apple ConnectEd grant funding 1:1 technology.   Counselors, Community Assistant and Parent Coordinator time for coordinating College Now and Community Funding for teacher teams coordinating services and funding for coordinator for YMCA Programs. Service activities. Funding for Coach from Morningside Center for Restorative Justice and PD for Restorative Justice practices.  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2   The Support Team (comprised of Principal, Parent Coordinator, social worker, guidance counselor, rotating teachers, community assistant and data analyst) create spread sheet documentation to be shared by the entire faculty via Google Docs. There, regular updates of student attendance and progress in supplemental programs both in the school and outside of the school can be viewed. This allows us to also evaluate efficacy of external programs not entirely under our purview, yet still entirely our concern and responsibility as our students attend them. Such programs include YMCA programs (where at mid-year, we want to ensure that at least 30 students are participating, with the majority in 9th grade), College Now programs (by February, enrollment of 9th and 10th graders has happened for all College Readiness programs [BMCC, STEP, SEO], Upward Bound, Hunter College Now), and that total number of students is on target. Here we can identify student need, track attendance and progress and evaluate efficacy of programs, while ensuring that students are targeted strategically and there is not overlap in participation in various programs.  Ensure smooth running and success of Cluster partnerships through student evaluations and scheduled teacher meetings. These programs include all students. Verify that intended internships for summer are in progress at mid-year.  By November, verify that targeted 12th graders are involved with extra Regents prep class.  January meeting with Morningside Center coach to assess progress towards community building. By mid year, all students shall have participated in multiple academic and community building circles. Cluster teams will plans to utilize these practices in a disciplinary context. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. YMCA records (all programs), Attendance records and periodic PBAT assessments: individual mentoring, Regents preparation class, SAT preparation class, Reading Plus program records, John Jay Upward Bound, BMCC Step, SEO Scholars, Mouse Squad, Green Team, after school Conversation Clubs, Big Brother/Big Sister mentoring, and New York Cares community service. Student surveys. Meeting with teachers and coach from Morningside Center for both hard and soft data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Our 2016-17 School Quality Snapshot reports 94 % responding positively to questions about Collaborative Teachers (compared to the City’s 83% score). 100% of teachers say that they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school. 100% of teachers say that they work together to design instructional programs compared to 86% of teachers citywide and 84% of Manhattan International's teachers say that they feel responsible that all student learn. Our QR report from 2014-2015 granted a Well Developed in the area of 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development, citing “The vast majority of teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry based collaborations. Distributed teacher leadership is embedded across all areas of the school.” The report cited meetings with two teacher teams to support this finding. 2. The priority need identified in the goal and action plan will continue to address our schoolwide shift towards to Outcomes-based assessment, which enables us to consider what skills and concepts students have mastered rather than simply what work has been completed. We will continue to use JumpRope software to track mastery of Outcomes and will improve our practices in this area. We believe this is a high leverage area of focus for our continuous professional development next year. We will continue our work with the Mastery Collaborative for school year 2018-2019, which will connect us to other schools working on Mastery based grading enabling us to refine our Outcomes and practices. We will participate in targeted inter-visitations to this end. The use of Mastery Based grading improves collaboration within and across disciplines by allowing teachers to see the common skills towards which they all teach, thus making it easier for teachers within a discipline to align skill building across the grades in a purposeful way. Ongoing teacher development and refining of outcomes will be one of the highest priorities as it will facilitate student mastery of skills used across and connecting all disciplines. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, using a review of the Jumprope grading program as evidence, all core academic subject teachers will have refined and aligned mastery-based outcomes for all instructional units based on specific student needs [and provide multiple opportunities for students to meet outcomes through periodic interim assessments] 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Analyze student work to determine skills gaps and adjust curriculum accordingly and provide each other feedback on proposed Outcomes and assessments. Teachers, Students All teachers will implement this work in both weekly Cluster meetings and twice monthly discipline meetings throughout the school year. PD workshops and educational consultants from The Internationals Network for Public schools will guide teachers in development of Outcomes through classroom and curriculum support. Teachers Participation in Mastery Collaborative working group through DOE will support this work. Teacher led PD workshops by the Mastery Collaborative Committee. PD meetings with partner schools and Jumprope staff and Mastery Collaborative staff, as well as weekly Cluster meetings will provide continued technical support for implementation of Teachers Cluster and discipline meetings, weekly/bi-weekly. Discipline Coordinators, Cluster Team Leaders Teachers will be supported in this work by Principal, Jumprope PD, Mastery Collaborative, monthly PD. All teachers, Principal, Parent Diagnostic and two interim assessments completed by end of semester one followed by 2 interim assessments in the Spring term. PD with INPS to begin in November and will continue on an ongoing basis through intervisitations. Mastery Collaborative Quarterly Meetings. Teachers will complete Outcomes in time for first 5  Jumprope grading software which assesses students based on mastery of Outcomes. Parental training in Jumprope to be ongoing in an effort to further involve and connect parents with the daily/regular performance, expectations and needs of their children. Parents Coordinator, support team. progress report (Nov. 3), refine Outcomes during Cluster meetings for second marking period (Dec. 20). Administrators will evaluate student progress at each marking period (Nov. 2 and Dec. 20, 2018, and Feb. 15, Apr. 12, Jun 10, 2019) using grades in Jumprope. Jumprope allows for real time data of student progress to be accessible to Administrators on an ongoing basis throughout the year. Individual parent training ongoing through the year, as needed (Fall and Spring Term by Parent Coordinator with guidance counselor and social worker) n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement n/a n/a n/a How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 6  Our Support Team, made up by two licensed guidance counselors, a licensed clinical social worker, a community assistant, a paraprofessional and the parent coordinator, will work on the following:  Parent Workshops (9th Grade Success, Immigration, Parenting, Teen Support, College Planning)  Training parents on the use of JumpRope / Mastery Based Learning (Fall and Spring terms)  Parent Teacher Association monthly meetings, Open School Week for Parents (Spring Term), Family Nights (Fall and Spring term), Weekly teacher meetings which include individual case management  ESL class, Rosetta Stone, Reading Plus (on going)  0ne on one counseling, conferencing, phone contact  Translation (as needed, ongoing) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PD time, weekly team planning time for teachers, Jumprope software, monthly PD in Mastery Assessment Collaborative through Digital Ready Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. All teachers will complete diagnostics in September and Outcomes for courses by end of first marking period and use Jumprope to record grades. 2. PD to refine and confirm development of quality Outcomes and [ensure alignment to New York State Performance Standards Consortium Rubrics and INPS principles.] 3. At mid-year, administrators will use "back office" function to review teacher outcomes for consistency and quality. At this point Outcomes should be consistent across disciplines. Feedback will be shard at Discipline Coordinator meeting. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Jumprope System, STARS Scholarship Reports, Attendance Sheets, Participation Feedback Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Our 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot shows that 97% responded positively to questions about effective school leadership. 95% of teachers say that the principal communicates a clear vision for the school (the city average is 85%). 100% of teachers say that curriculum, instruction and learning materials are well coordinated across different grade levels (the city average is 81%). 96% of parents feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school, as compared to 93% citywide. During 2017-2018 school year we conducted observations and met with teachers as per our PROSE agreement. We have been able to adapt our teacher evaluation system based on the PROSE option and this meant we could include more robust and formalized inter-visitations aligned with teacher goals. Teachers participated in presenting their structured review portfolios in the spring for professional review and feedback from colleagues and administrators. This process was very successful and teachers shared curriculum at both mid year and end of year for 2017-2018. Based on Teacher responses to the 2016-17 NYC School Survey which 90% of our teachers completed, the teachers indicated a strong sense of responsibility for the school, the outcomes of the students who attend, and towards their own professional growth both as individuals and as colleagues. 2. During the 2018-19 academic year we will continue to honor this professional dedication and provide opportunities of leadership and responsibility for all teachers in our community, allowing each faculty member to be further empowered in leading the school's successes according to their own needs, interests, and abilities, while mastering their craft and skills in supporting our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will participate in differentiated professional development targeted to improve their capacity to give actionable feedback after observing teachers. Measurable by an increase in the overall number of Highly Effective teachers as compared to June 2018. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School leaders will participate in separate monthly meetings for Principals and Assistant Principals with the Internationals Network for Public Schools (INPS), which address teaching practices, standards, problems of practice and best practices for ELLs. We will also continue to develop our crosswalk between the INPS rubric and the Danielson framework to integrate our approach to educating ELLs with our use of the Danielson framework. Principal, teachers Principal, AP and INPS facilitators and coaches School leaders attend one full day meeting per month, agenda and minutes shared with Coordinating Council. Principal will participate in a Critical Friends leadership group through The Leadership Academy which will continue to support evaluation of success of our restructuring process. Principal, staff Participate Principal and Leadership Academy Coach Principal, AP, teachers at each school. Principal, AP, teachers at each school in Consultancy protocol to present problem of practice and explore solutions with Colleagues and Coach. Three times per year targeted visits between schools. Three times per year targeted visits between schools. School leaders will participate in Consortium partnership with Brooklyn International. These school visits will allow them to visit classrooms with supervisors at another school and norm ratings and discuss actionable feedback in a context similar to our home school. Team of 3 teachers, full staff, administrators School leaders will participate in Consortium Schools' Intervisitations to focus on Master Collaborative work. These school visits will allow them to visit classrooms with supervisors at another school and norm ratings and discuss actionable feedback in a context similar to our home school. Team of 3 teachers, full staff, administrators 9  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Support Team, made up by two guidance counselors, social worker, paraprofessional, community assistant and the parent coordinator, will work on the following:  Parent trainings on the use of JumpRope / Mastery Based Learning (Fall and Spring terms), Preparing for College and Career Readiness(Fall and Spring terms), Tutoring and After School Opportunities, (Ongoing) Relationship Building with school(Ongoing), and Importance of Parental Involvement for Student Success (Fall and Spring semester), Restorative Justice (twice a year each)  Parents will be supported in their roles with our School Leadership Team (once a month) and our Coordinating Council (weekly) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PD time, weekly team planning time for teachers, Jumprope software, monthly PD in Master Collaborative Assessment Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.   In February, administrator will have completed half of all teacher observations and met with teachers within a week of the observation to provide actionable feedback. In February, administrator will have participated in 5 meetings and classroom visits at other International and Consortium schools, as well as 5 Critical Friends meetings. In February, at the teacher mid-year check in, teachers will review observations from last year and compare them to observations from this year to check that progress has been made on at least two indicators. Planning will commence with teachers and Principal to select a focus on goals for professional progress, and the indicators that will enable both the teacher and Principal to evaluate its development both mid-way through the remainder of the year, and by the end of the year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PPO feedback, NYC Leadership Academy and INPS coach reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Our 2016-2017 School Quality Snaphot show that 90% responded positively to questions about Strong Family-Community ties. 93% of parents say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how parents can help their child learn, as compared to 87% citywide. 95% of teachers say that teachers at the this school work closely with families to meet student needs, as compared to 88% citywide. Our school has received positive feedback in the area of setting high expectations for parents and students around college expectations. The principal states that from day one, students and parents at Manhattan International High School understand the expectation that all graduates will attend college. Students have many opportunities to participate in College Now with Hunter College, Hostos College, Borough of Manhattan Community College. John Jay and through Naviance Program. The principal and teacher teams communicate high expectations through faculty and student handbooks, School Messenger, and online grading system. Free ESL classes are offered to parents through CBO partners and parents have online access to school programs such as, Rosetta Stone, Jumprope, Naviance. Student government organizes all student activities. Town halls are held once a month to reinforce a positive school culture and provide interactive presentations.” An excerpt from our feedback from our recent DQR Report (this is our most recent feedback on School Environment, indicator 1.4):  The school’s approach to culture building, discipline and socio-emotional support is informed by a theory of action and results in a safe environment that supports students and aligns to school goals, involving students in the school in a variety of ways. (1.4. Well Developed Rating)  The school’s approach to culture is to provide a safe environment that includes culture building and team building across the school and among grade levels. The first week of school is dedicated to an orientation for all students to provide them with opportunities to interact with one another, with staff and sometimes parents in order to build team and culture in the school. There is also a structure in place to connect seniors with a freshman buddy to best support the incoming students and build bonds across grades. The administrators have an open door policy with staff, students and parents so that all three stakeholders were able to speak to strong communication and support in the school. In interdisciplinary, grade level team meetings teachers serve as mentors to students and partner with guidance to serve as case managers in order to best support individual students. As a result there is a strong environment of safety and support that includes parents in communication. This also supports academic progress in that students are aware of what they need to work on. In addition, fifty students participate in student government across grades and have initiated special activities and organized them alongside teachers. As a result, students take ownership of their school environment and take part in culture building in many of the same ways as teachers 2. To build on our strengths in this area we will focus on communication with parents about Mastery Based Learning, as well as continuing to work to boost attendance at all parent events during the coming school year. We believe we can improve by increasing efforts to get parents logged on to our grading Software (Jumprope) so that they can access 2  information about student progress at any time. In addition we want to continue to increase parent attendance at events throughout the year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will improve communication about grades and curriculum and provide a welcoming environment to parents as indicated by over 30% attendance at parent events, as measured by attendance sign-in sheets, increased parent log-in on Jumprope and improvement on the Learning Environment Survey results 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Train staff to use Jumprope grading software and provide access to parents and students. Teachers, parents, students Parent Coordinator will provide multiple workshops, as well as one-on-one training for parents to use Jumprope. In September, teacher teams will designate a teacher who will take students through the process of signing in to Jumprope and show them how to monitor grades. Host Open school night so that parents can observe student classes, targeting parents of struggling students Parents Teacher training in Jumprope in September, October and January. By January students will have access, by June parents will have access. By the end of November host Open School night Administrators, Coordinating Council members, mastery Collaborative team of two teachers. Parent Coordinator, teachers, administrators Increase parent participation during partners' showcases (outcomes showcases), organize parent events in the Spring to share student work in film making, cooking and engineering. Events will be scheduled at alternating times/days; (if needed and funds are available), childcare and transportation fare in order to increase parent attendance will be provided. Parents Parents March/April 2019 March/April 2019 4 Teachers, all students, 9-11th grade parents. 4 Teachers, all students, 9-11th grade parents. 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Script Ed Family Cook Productions Strike Anywhere Immigration Coalition  YMCA   Beam Center   MCC Theater    Mount Sinai Adolescent Health Clinic   New York Cares  Big Brother Big Sisters   Morning Side Heights Center for Restorative Justice  Apple ConnectED  Mastery Collaborative Inside Out Community Art Project French Embassy of NYC Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Refreshments for open school night and other parent meetings, Metrocards for parents to attend events.  Parent Coordinator and Community Assistant per session for evening Parent events.  T shirts for student interns Jumprope PD for teachers  Supervisor per session for evening events.  Food for Spring partner events.   Planning time for teachers and partner organizations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February, all teachers complete grades using Jumprope, with continuing PD provided for all teachers and faculty. Training for parents to take place in a group meeting in the fall, and ongoing individual training to be offered throughout the year. Student access and training to take place during school. All students and 55% of parents should have access to Jumprope software, as measured by log-in data. In February, compare Fall parent night attendance to last year and plan on how to improve for Spring Parent events. In February, begin planning for Partner shares with parents through Master Collaborative initiative.   5  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Jumprope system, Attendance sheets at parent events (PTA, walk-ins, workshops) and improvement on the Learning Environment Survey results Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) We use a combination of data sources, including: teacher diagnostics, official lowest third identification, scholarship reports and other assessment data. Mathematics We use a combination of data sources, including: teacher diagnostics, official lowest third identification, scholarship reports and other assessment data. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) All students receive extra academic assistance through increased individualized attention as a result of small class sizes in all core subjects Recent immigrant English Language Learners receive after-school tutoring in English, in order to build their literacy skills and improve their ability to participate and complete homework and projects in all of their content area classes. All students receive extra academic assistance through increased individualized attention as a result of small class sizes in all core subjects Recent immigrant English Language Learners receive after-school tutoring in English, in order to build their literacy Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Students’ language is developed in all content area classes and via after-school programs which emphasize cooperative learning and verbal interactions with peers in small groups. Seniors receive one-to-one mentoring on their portfolios weekly. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) More individualized attention during class periods and in tutoring after school. All students who require extra support for the ELA exam receive after- school Regents prep (11 th and 12 th grade) Targeted Literacy Class More individualized attention during class periods and in tutoring after school. Students’ language is developed in all content area classes and via after-school programs which emphasize cooperative learning and verbal interactions with peers in small groups. Seniors receive one-to-one mentoring on their portfolios weekly. 7  Science Social Studies skills and improve their ability to participate and complete homework and projects in all of their content area classes. All students receive extra academic assistance through increased individualized attention as a result of small class sizes in all core subjects. After-school tutoring for our most recent immigrant ELL students. All students receive extra academic assistance through increased individualized attention as a result of small class sizes in all core subjects. After-school tutoring for our most recent immigrant ELL students. We use a combination of data sources, including: teacher diagnostics, official lowest third identification, scholarship reports and other assessment data. We use a combination of data sources, including: teacher diagnostics, official lowest third identification, scholarship reports and other assessment data. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students are identified by referrals from teachers, administrators or parent coordinator Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, School Psychologist, Mt. Sinai Health Clinic, Community Based organizations Students’ language is developed in all content area classes and via after-school programs which emphasize cooperative learning and verbal interactions with peers in small groups. Seniors receive one-to-one mentoring on their portfolios weekly. Students’ language is developed in all content area classes and via after-school programs which emphasize cooperative learning and verbal interactions with peers in small groups. Seniors receive one-to-one mentoring on their portfolios weekly. Groups and one to one. More individualized attention during class periods and in tutoring after school. More individualized attention during class periods and in tutoring after school. Students also have a chance to receive assistance in this subject during the Saturday Academy. During elective time, lunch time or after school. 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) As of June 2018, we have identified 49 students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. As stated in the Chancellor Regulations A780, students in temporary housing will be provided with all services offered to other students in the school. This includes compensatory educational programs for the disadvantaged, educational programs for the disabled and for students with limited English proficiency, access to programs in vocational education, programs for the gifted and talented, transportation and school meal programs. Teacher teams and our school social worker will assess student needs and create an action plan for further assistance. School supplies have been purchased to provide to each individual child according to their needs. (School bags with school supplies, school shirts and sweatpants and toiletries. Students will be referred for free eye glass program and on site free medical care in the school health center. Socio emotional support is also offered. Counseling (one-on-one, small group) and further support services are also coordinated and provided. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). not applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  not applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. not applicable 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The Manhattan International High School (MIHS) recruits highly qualified teaching candidates through both the NYCDOE Open Market system and via the Internationals Network of Public Schools, a non-profit organization that oversees and coordinates activities amongst the NYCDOE’s 15 International High Schools. Through our membership in this network, we have access to resumes of the school system’s most highly qualified pedagogues with vast experience working with ELLs, who solely comprise all of the International High Schools’ student populations. Our network also has its own in-house student apprentice program, I-START, in which the certification program curriculum (developed in conjunction with Long Island University) and student teaching practicum are aligned with the pedagogical philosophy of the Internationals Network for Public Schools, called the Internationals Approach. All I-START teachers-in-training work side-by-side with a mentor teacher in an International High School throughout their apprenticeship year. By the end of the year, they are deemed eligible by the NYCDOE to work as full-time teachers within the public school system. Many of these new teachers find positions within on the city’s 15 International High Schools. Through this innovative program, the International High Schools “train their own” new teachers. MIHS’ rate of teacher attrition is extremely low, due to opportunities for teacher leadership and high quality professional development. The Coordinating Council, MIHS’ ruling body, is comprised mainly of representatives from each of the school’s interdisciplinary teaching teams, but also includes representatives from guidance, administration, students and parents. Thus teachers have great decision-making power in establishing, maintaining and altering school-wide policies. Further, professional growth of all pedagogues is fostered on two levels: bi-weekly subject area discipline meetings and weekly interdisciplinary grade level team (called Clusters) meetings. During common prep periods, all teachers of the same subject area discipline meet every other week and follow protocols designed by the National School Reform Faculty (NSRF) in order to analyze and provide feedback on each other’s curriculum, with a critical eye towards meeting the tenets of the Internationals Approach, as well as the school-wide goals as informed by the Danielson framework. Teachers also meet in their Cluster teams weekly in order to discuss student progress. They also use NSRF protocols in order to examine the work of their mutually shared students. In this way, all of a student’s teachers come together to discuss his or her progress, as well as look for broader patterns in student learning that can be altered to improve student achievement. Because each Cluster Team contains at least one ESL-certified teacher, each Cluster Team member, regardless of subject area certification, learns about ESL strategies to further enhance instruction across disciplines. All teachers also receive specialized training in ESL strategies and working with ELLs through network-wide professional development through the Internationals Network for Public Schools. They provide workshops during the summer, Election Day, and at various times throughout the school year through after-school seminars and teacher inter-visitations (peer observations at various IHSs). MIHS teachers also participate in discipline-specific professional development workshops sponsored by the New York Performance 1  Standards Consortium and the Center for Inquiry, which is centered in our building, the Julia Richman Education Complex. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our professional development begins in-house. In September teachers set yearly goals aligned with our instructional framework, they are observed a minimum of 6 six times per year and receive feedback and next steps. There is peer inter-visitation to facilitate peer feedback as well. Teachers also engage in a mid-year check-in and end of year reflection process so that instruction is constantly improving. Teachers also meet in disciplines and grade teams weekly in order to conduct inquiry around student work, as well as using a protocol to share feedback on instructional tasks. Finally, we also reach out to our external partners: The Internationals for Public Schools, The NYS Performance Standards Consortium, NYC DOE Office of English Language Learner’s for professional development. All of our teachers will participate in differentiated PD through these organizations on topics such as Outcomes based grading, differentiation, and literacy strategies for Students with Interrupted Formal Education. Our 'in house' scheduled PDs on Thursdays will coordinate. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). not applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). not applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2  In conversation with teachers at other International and Consortium schools teachers have identified assessment measures (including teacher made diagnostics, Reading Plus software, Learning Upgrade (Math) software and interim assessments based on the Consortium graduation rubric. Teachers receive professional development during weekly PD time as requested. Teacher teams work together to look at student work, using protocols developed in collaboration with the Internationals Network for Public schools. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 1-5 Sections 1,2,3 Sections 1-5 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 295,572.00 0 29,992.00 0 2,270,433.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. 3  Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Manhattan International High School, in compliance with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The Manhattan International High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children;  ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 5  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 6  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Manhattan International HS , in compliance with the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards and Assessments. 7  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by theEvery Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 8 I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time, as well as follows the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 9  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 0  1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 10 6 4 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Title III Supplemental Instructional Program All classes at Manhattan International High School, during the school day or supplemental, follow the INPS approach which uses English as the language of instruction. The Title III Program provides English Language Learners with supplemental instruction in an After-School Title III Program, a Saturday Academy for ELA and Science Literacy, After-School Title III Small Group Enrichment Program, and a Yearbook Class. The instructional programs will service ELL students of all grade levels who score at the entering, emerging, transitioning, and expanding levels on the NYSESLAT. Teachers will be paid at the per session rate. The program runs from October 2018 through June 2019. Students in need of additional support are identified early on the basis of diagnostic test data, interviews and teacher observations shared at weekly team cluster meetings. The STARs system, Jumprope and marking period grades are also utilized in evaluating student need. Identified students are targeted for additional support in the Title III supplemental instructional programs mentioned above which are designed to meet their linguistic and academic needs. In addition, our former ELLs may participate for up to two years after exiting ELL status. All of our ESL teachers are fully licensed, and all of our content area teachers receive more than 10 hours of ESL training annually. Saturday Academy for ELA and Science Literacy The Saturday Academy addresses the needs of our newest ELLs and SIFE students in 9th and 10th grade in need of literacy and science support based on teacher recommendation and an analysis of recent NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores. Reading Plus software will also be utilized in the class and at home to complement classroom teaching, allowing students to work independently on building their basic speaking, listening comprehension, and reading and writing skills in English. An ESL teacher team teaches with an ELA teacher and a science teacher to help students improve their academic literacy skills across content areas. Students develop science literacy using English acquisition through new vocabulary learning and oral practice through individual, group, and class discussion. Other instructional materials include bilingual dictionaries, USB drives, and composition journal books, poster boards, construction paper and other art supplies. There are planned trips to Liberty Science Center, Union Square Market, New York Hall of Science. Classes are team taught by a certified ESL teacher and an ELA teacher, and a certified Social Studies teacher and a science teacher, respectively. Classes will meet during the Spring semester for 8 sessions (March 2, 9, 16, April 6, 13 May 4, 11, 18) of 2 hours each, 9:00 am - 11:00 am and 11:00 am - 1:00 pm, beginning March 2, 2019 and ending on May 18, 2019. 60 students in grades 9 and 10 will be served. After School Title III Instructional Program 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Targets 72 ELLs in grades 9 and 10 in the lowest third by providing supplementary, language-rich instruction in English. The after school program supports student literacy skills by enhancing student writing through support in developing vocabulary and grammar skills as well as improving reading comprehension. Reading Plus software will also be utilized in the class and at home to complement classroom teaching, allowing students to work independently building their basic speaking, listening comprehension, and reading and writing skills in English. Instructional materials include bilingual dictionaries, USB drives and composition journal books. Three classes meet for three hours per week on Monday, Thursday from 3:30-4:30 and Friday from 2:30 - 3:30 from February 2019 -June 2019 (Feb. 4, 7, 8, 11, 14, 15, 25, 28 March 1, 4, 7, 8, 11, 14, 15, 18, 21, 22, 25, 28, 29 April 1,4, 5, 8, 11, 12, 15, 18, 29 May 2, 3, 6, 9, 10, 13,16, 17, 20, 23, 24, 30 June 3, 7, 10, 13, 14). Classes are taught by three certified ESL teachers. After School Title III Small Group Instruction Provides direct instruction to a small group (24) of ELLs with ELA literacy needs based on NYSESLAT scores and NYS standardized testing. The class will be targeted to 11th and 12th graders who tested at the intermediate and advanced level. The focus of instruction will be on improving and enhancing reading and writing skills which will help to develop students college readiness. Instructional materials will include the cost of the novels The Namesake by Jhumpa Lahiri and The Arrival by Shaun Tan. The class meets after school for two hours per week on Mondays from 3:10 - 5:10 for 20 weeks (October 1, 15, 22, 29 November 5, 19, 26, December 3, 10, 17 January 7, 14, February 4, 11, 25 March 4, 11, 18, 25 April 1, 8, 29) and is team taught by a certified ESL teacher and an ELA teacher. Yearbook Class The rationale for this class is to enhance language development through hands on activities such as writing text and captions, designing layouts, proofing and editing written work. Furthermore, math is integrated through page design, measurements and fittings, geometric patterning and layout, all done within a collaborative setting in which team communication is of paramount importance. The class targets 16 11th and 12th grade students and is team taught by a certified ESL teacher and a math teacher. These teachers are members of the same teaching team, and therefore are able to work on class development during common prep time and officially scheduled team meeting time during the week. Instructional materials include graphing calculators, USB drives and copy paper. The class meets once per week on Mondays from 4:05 pm - 6:05 pm for 20 weeks (November 5, 19, 26 December 3, 10, 17, January 7, 14 February 4, 11, 25 March 4, 11, 18, 25 April 31, 8, 29 May 6, 13, 20). Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Because Manhattan International High School is a part of the International Network for Public Schools, serving an ELL population, all professional development includes explorations and growth of teachers in the area of improving language acquisition and fluency across all disciplines for all levels of students. Title III professional development program will focus on providing teachers with various instructional strategies for teaching English Language 4  Part C: Professional Development Learners. It will also focus on how to prepare ELLs to meet and exceed the NYC and NYS performance and learning Standards and achieve higher scores on all city and state assessments. Teachers participating in the professional development workshops will be paid at the trainee rate and teacher trainers will be paid at per session rate. These professional development sessions will be facilitated by fellow faculty members and school administrators. In addition to our regular monthly professional development meetings held during the school day, teachers working in the Title III supplementary instructional program will receive 7 sessions of professional development after school on Wednesday from 3:20 pm to 4:30 pm. They will also have the opportunity to attend outside professional development workshops offered throughout the year by International Network for Public Schools (INPS), New York Performance Standards Consortium, Mastery Collaborative, a program of the DOE's Office of Post Secondary Readiness, and the Apple ConnectED Initiative. Planned Timeline: 1. One 1-hour session, October 17, 2018: workshop on writing quality IEPs for ELLs. This workshop is intended to examine specific needs held by ELLs who also have an IEP, what overlaps and what may conflict, and how to meet accommodations to best support all challenges faced by the student. Anticipated attendees include 7 ESL licensed teachers and other staff. 2. One 1-hour session, October 24, 2018: Using Google and Apple Classroom, as well as Schoology, as management systems incorporating language strategies to Increase engagement. Attendees included 6 ESL licensed teachers and other staff. 3. One 1-hour session, November 7, 2018, from 3:20-4:30 pm: Basic Smartboard training to Increase Engagement for ELLs. Anticipated attendees include 5 ESL certified teachers plus other staff members. 4.. One 1-hour session, November 14, 2018, from 3:20-4:30 pm: Focusing on strategies for language and content integration and supporting ELL students in writing portfolio projects. (Planned: To be facilitated by an ESL certified pedagogue. Anticipated attendance includes 5 ESL certified teachers and 9 Content area teachers.) 5.One 1-hour session, January 23, 2019, from 3:20-4:30 pm: Focusing on sharing interdisciplinary projects looking through the lens of scaffolding for our ELLs. (Planned: To be facilitated by an ESL licensed pedagogue. Anticipated attendees include 5 ESL certified teachers and 9 content area teachers.) 6. One 1-hour session, February 6, 2019 from 3:20-4:30 pm: Focusing on developing project based interdisciplinary curriculum for our ELL students and creating interdisciplinary strategies to support ELL students. (Planned: To be facilitated by an ESL certified pedagogue. Anticipated attendees include 5 ESL certified teachers and 9 Content area teachers. Once again this coming year 28 schools and academies in the Internationals Network of Public Schools (INPS) will jointly plan and coordinate after school workshops to support teachers. Staff from all 28 schools will continue to be engaged in workshops to discuss second language acquisition, project based education, collaborative learning, thematic interdisciplinary instruction, scaffolding, and language development in the content area. Over the next year Manhattan International High School will conduct workshops and staff development on curriculum sharing within the school and will work jointly with the other 27 INPS schools to conduct curriculum sharing so that teachers and staff can benefit from shared knowledge and professional development. Future workshops are in the planning stage. ESL certified teachers, Nina Kogutt-Akkum and Kholood Qumei, will facilitate these workshops. 5  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Title III Parent Engagement Based on a needs assessment conducted by our Parent Coordinator, Manhattan International will offer a Parent ESL class taught by a certified ESL teacher, every Thursday from 4:30 - 6:00 pm for 19 weeks (January 3, 10, 17, 24, 31 February 7, 14, 28 March 7, 14, 21, 28 April 4, 11, 18 and May 2, 9, 16, 23). Instructional materials will be purchased to support parent activity and light refreshments will be served. The class and workshops will be listed on our school website and distributed by mail in our monthly parent newsletter with instructions on how to register. In terms of of home language support and communications, we utilize the DOE Translating Unit, and are fortunate to have a staff which speaks 10 languages. Working to develop language acquisition, understanding and fluency with parents in much the same way we work with our students, parents have the opportunity to engage in many of the supplemental activities and structures we use with our After- and Saturday school programs. This experience engages the parents and allows them to not only become more involved in their own development, but also in that of their child. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 6  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 2 School Name The Manhattan International High School Borough Manhattan School Number 459 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Gladys Dorilda Rodriguez Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Nina Kogut Akkum Teacher/Subject Area Moses Ahn / ESL Social Studies Teacher/Subject Area Gallia Kassiano / ELA Teacher Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Kathy Rehfield-Pelles Assistant Principal Heather Cristol Coach type here School Counselor Allison Finiasz Parent Parent Coordinator Daira Olivero Field Support Center Staff Member Jocelyn Santana Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 8  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 343 Total number of ELLs 242 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 70.55% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We have been using Reading Plus, an online reading program, that includes a diagnostic as well as remediation with our SIFE and beginner students. For SIFE students we will also use Reading Horizons if appropriate, a phonics based program that begins with the alphabet and includes translation. This year we have broadened our usage of Reading Plus to include all students because we saw that students who logged the time on the program rose an average of two reading levels in a year. This online tool provides precise data about areas of strength and weakness. We see that, in general, areas of strength include re-reading skills and meta-cognition, where areas of weakness are in close reading and inference. The results allow us to gear our instruction toward helping the student in areas of academic need and tailor extra help specifically geared to those students. We also use teacher made assessments that allow us to assess student's abilities in writing and math. This information helps inform our school's instructional plan, allowing us to design curriculum to address the specific needs of 9  students. It is particularly helpful for those students in our SIFE class and is a useful tool to share with our content area teachers and after school tutors. Our teachers work to develop reading and writing skills through all content areas. Through this consistent reinforcement of reading and writing in their classes as well as in our afterschool and Saturday programming, students see improvement over time. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? These efforts are reviewed by our grade level and discipline teams, as well as our school's coordinating council/school leadership team, our school's governing bodies. Plans of action are shared and implemented after each review. Budgetary allocations are ensured each year to support programs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our program is measured through the analysis of a wide array of data sources, including: • Graduation rate • Course pass rate • Regents pass rate • Attendance rate • Learning Environment Survey-student results • Learning Environment Survey -parent results • Learning Environment Survey-teacher results • Drop out rate • College class passing rate • Portfolio passing rate Manhattan International HS is part of the New York Performance Standards Consortium which is a network of schools who have been granted a variance which allows for portfolio-based assessment in lieu of the New York State Regents Exams. We only administer the ELA Regents exam, and therefore have only included our ELA Regents scores in this document. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? These efforts are reviewed by our grade level and discipline teams, as well as our school's coordinating council/school leadership team, our school's governing bodies. Plans of action are shared and implemented after each review. Budgetary allocations are ensured each year to support programs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT data indicates the following for our incoming 9 th graders: Beginners: 37% Emerging: 15% Transitioning: 11% Expanding: 23% Proficient: 14% While there are naturally fluctuations in the levels of our incoming students, the general trend seems to be that as students move through the grades their literary level improves but most students move up to the Intermediate and Advanced level and many test out. For example, by 12 th grade our data looks as follows: Beginners: 1% Emerging: 8% 0  Transitioning: 5% Expanding: 20% Proficient: 70% An analysis of our NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results for the school reveals several things: a) Our population is incredibly heterogeneous in terms of language ability. b) Most students classified as beginners (beginners and emerging) and intermediates (transitioning and expanding) are situated in the lower grades (9 and 10) while most students deemed expanding and proficient are in the higher grades (11 and 12). c) The vast majority of students show improvement in at least two of the NYSESLAT language modalities. d) Our NYSITELL data indicates that although most of our new arrivals test as Beginners and nearly all score very low in listening, reading, and writing, after this, the most crucial pattern we see is one of improvement. Our current prediction for the senior class this year is that we will have about 30% of them reading at or above a college ready level of 280 wpm by June. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Outcome assessment data is reviewed by our grade level and discipline teams, as well as our school's coordinating council/school leadership team, our school's governing bodies. Plans of action are shared and implemented after each review. Budgetary allocations are ensured each year to support programs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. As per the new CR Part 154 requirements, beginning September 2015, students will be carefully programmed to receive the mandated ENL and ELA instructional minutes based on new proficiency guidelines. Beginners/Entering students will receive a minimum of 540 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 180 minutes of ENL standalone, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 180 minutes of standalone or intergrated ENL with ELA or any other content area). Low Intermediates/Emerging will receive 360 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area.) Intermediate/Transitioning willl receive 180 ENL minutes per week (this consists of 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area). Advanced/Expanding will receive 180 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area.) Proficient/Commanding or students who are former ELL's will receive 90 minutes of ENL each week (this consists of 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area.) We have a series of delivery models to ensure that each student receives these mandated ESL and ELA minutes through discrete ESL classes as well as many classes taught by dual certified ESL/content area teachers. (ie: teachers who have dual certification in both ESL and a content area such as ESL/English, ESL/Social Studies and ESL/Biology certification.) Each instructional team includes at least one teacher who is licensed in ESL; in addition, all of our content area teachers are trained in language development and ESL methodologies and encouraged to pursue ESL certification. The school schedule and teacher programming ensure that all entitled ESL students receive the mandated number of minutes required according to CR Part 154. In addition to our regular content curriculum all ELL students are given extra ESL instruction in order to meet the number of minutes they require of ESL instruction each week. 1  b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Mandated Instructional minutes: As per the new CR Part 154 requirements, beginning September 2015, students will be carefully programmed to receive the mandated ENL and ELA instructional minutes based on new proficiency guidelines. Beginners/Entering students will receive a minimum of 540 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 180 minutes of ENL standalone, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 180 minutes of standalone or intergrated ENL with ELA or any other content area). Low Intermediates/Emerging will receive 360 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area.) Intermediate/Transitioning willl receive 180 ENL minutes per week (this consists of 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area). Advanced/Expanding will receive 180 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area.) Proficient/Commanding or students who are former ELL's will receive 90 minutes of ENL each week (this consists of 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area.) We have a series of delivery models to ensure that each student receives these mandated ESL and ELA minutes through discrete ESL classes as well as many classes taught by dual certified ESL/content area teachers. (ie: teachers who have dual certification in both ESL and a content area such as ESL/English, ESL/Social Studies and ESL/Biology certification.) Each instructional team includes at least one teacher who is licensed in ESL; in addition, all of our content area teachers are trained in language development and ESL methodologies and encouraged to pursue ESL certification. The school schedule and teacher programming ensure that all entitled ESL students receive the mandated number of minutes required according to CR Part 154. In addition to our regular content curriculum all ELL students are given extra ESL instruction in order to meet the number of minutes they require of ESL instruction each week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 3. Delivery of content material: At International High School our ESL teachers as well as all of our content area teachers provide content area support for ELL's through all content area classes. All students take math, science, social studies, and ESL and/or English every year. Although the language that teachers use from the front of the room is English, the language of instruction for specific projects and on any specific day is collaboratively determined – students use both English and their native languages to explore content and the locus of control for language is student-driven by the content and the students’ needs. Instruction is not unidirectional from teacher to student in our school. Students work in groups to complete collaborative tasks that both develop language and content knowledge. The instructional method used in delivering content area instruction is through the Internationals Network for Public Schools (INPS) Approach. This research-based instructional approach utilizes five strategies which foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. They consist of heterogeneity and collaboration, experiential and project based learning, language and content integration, localized autonomy and responsibility and one learning model for all. A variety of instructional materials are used such as: laptops, library books, work books, dictionaries and teacher-generated activities. The educational principles of The Internationals High School at LaGuardia Community College include an approach to curriculum that is student-centered, inquiry- driven, and project-based, revolving around themes and essential questions that provide a balance between content and English language skill building. Small, heterogeneous grouping within classes provides a powerful vehicle for English acquisition, wherein students from diverse language backgrounds use English to accomplish a given task, drawing on their native language as a resource. Language and literacy are developed through interaction with peers and teachers about meaningful ideas in authentic context. 2  In order to provide our students with native language support in the content area we provide our students with bilingual dictionaries, peer group support, native language texts, as well as bilingual paraprofessionals to assist in the classroom. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At the Manhattan International High School, ELL’s are appropriately evaluated using the instuctional strategies as described in Question # 6 (a-e) below. At orientation, incoming ELL’s are given a native language assessment. At MIHS, we greatly value students' native languages. All of our interdisciplinary classes have native language components to them. We have a comprehensive native language performance-based assessment which all of our ELL students must complete in order to graduate. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) Instructional plan for SIFE Students: All students who are identified as SIFE students (Students with Interrupted/Inconsistant Formal Education) are immediately placed in our SIFE program where they receive additional support in English literacy until a level of proficiency is achieved as determined by the SIFE coordinator and the SIFE leadership team along with the student’s individual teachers and guidance counselors. The common denominator among these students is a weakness or inability to read or write in their native language. Teachers and guidance counselors identify students who meet this profile through an examination of report cards, educational history and student work, student parent interviews and teachers referrals. Once students are identified to enter the SIFE program, our challenge is to find ways to teach students to read and write in English and acquire content knowledge when they have limited, if any, literacy skills in any language and may also have serious affective issues as well. In order to service students who are struggling, each team has provided extra services: including one-on-one work with a paraprofessional, small group instruction, and after school tutoring. School-wide, a Saturday enrichment program has been established, and changes in student programs (such as an extra language arts period) have been made. Over the past four years with the money’s from the SIFE grant literacy program an accelerated literacy program was implemented school-wide and met with enthusiasm by staff, students and parents. Our SIFE model requires three important features: • An intensive Language Arts period is held during the regular core daily program to accelerate learning taught by a specially trained literacy ESL licensed teacher in small group settings of five to ten students in which instruction is guided by individual students’ needs. This class is focused on reading comprehension, reading fluency and vocabulary development based on high interest topics drawn from the social studies curriculum. • Scaffolding students’ work in regular heterogeneous classes for most of the school day by developing collaboration between the SIFE teacher and content area teachers to generalize and practice newly learned skills and strategies across a variety of settings. A team teaching approach would be used in which the SIFE teacher plans with the content areas teacher, works with SIFE students in the classroom daily to implement strategies, and also meets after class sessions with the content area teacher to discuss students’ work and review lessons and activities. • All SIFE students are expected to attend extra after school home work sessions and are also enrolled in our weekly Saturday Explorers club which serves to enhance their literacy skills through exploration of NYC and its environment. • Our SIFE Leadership team has completed a SIFE toolkit which will be shared with other SIFE schools throughout the city. • Our SIFE Leadership team has also hosted a series of Open Houses over the past four years for SIFE Teachers from throughout the city in order to share best practices among educators of SIFE as well as all ELL students. b) Instructional Plan for Newcomer ELL Students: Newcomers to the school, along with their parents, meet initially with a guidance counselor who assesses their needs and academic development during intake. All new students and their parents receive an orientation developed by the guidance staff along with the parent coordinator. All students new to the United States and to NYC are given the NYSITELL exam which assesses the students English language abilities. For students transferring in from NYC schools, test results are reviewed and 3  students are then matched with teams of teachers who it is felt would best meet the needs of the specific student. Students are placed in appropriate classes according to their specific needs. The teachers meet in team to discuss the specific needs of all new students. A plan is formulated to best meet the needs of each particular student. c) Instructional Plan for Developing ELL's: The plan for developing ELLs receiving service for 4-6 years consists of ongoing support and mentoring. ELLs with 4-6 years of service are placed in appropriate classes to best meet their needs and continue their English language development. Their teachers meet regularly in teams to discuss the needs fo the specific students. A plan is formulated and updated regularly to meet the needs of each student. ELLs who are receiving service for 4-6 years receive a full program and receive all the same support structures as the rest of our ELL poplulations. Struggling ELLs who are receiving 4-6 years of service are encouraged and often mandated to avail themselves of all the extra support opportunities provided to all the students at large. This help takes the form of one-on-one mentoring, small group instruction, after school homework help, the Saturday literacy program as well as a variety of other activities. ELLs with 4-6 years of service are encouraged to try to take some college classes to help them to begin the transition towards college life. These ELLs with 4-6 years who meet regularly with their guidance counselor and teachers on their team to receive support and feedback to help assess in their language development. d) Instructional Plan for Long Term ELL's: The plan for long term ELLs consists of ongoing support and mentoring. Long term ELLs continue with a full program whether they are with us 5 or 6 years and retain all of the same support structures in place for the entire student population. Struggling long term ELLs are encouraged to take advantage of all extra help opportunities provided to the students at large. This extra help takes the form of one-on-one mentoring, small group instruction, after school homework help, writing center as well as a variety of other activities. Whenever possible, long-term ELLs are encouraged to begin taking college classes to help them to begin the transition towards college life. At MIHS long term ELLs regularly begin taking remedial college classes. All long term ELLs in college classes receive support from a high school teacher mentor. e) Instructional Plan for Former ELL's up to 2 years after exiting ELL status): As students reach proficiency and test out through the NYSESLAT assessment, they continue to receive a full program of ESL services to support and provide for their continued academic growth and development of English proficiency. Students receive higher levels of project opportunities and also have the opportunity to take college classes in any of their academic areas through Hunter College Now, John Jay Upward Bound and BMCC. Students who are determined to have reached proficiency continue to receive support from their teachers as needed per CR Part 154.2. All former ELLs receive their mandated .5 unit of ESL services. Former ELLs continue to receive the mandated testing accomodations after they they have tested out on the NYSESLAT exam. All former ELLs in college classes receive support from a high school teacher mentor. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies and grade level materials used to provide ELL-SWDs access to academic areas and accelerate English language development: The guidance counselor, Assistant Principal and Special Education teacher review all IEP’s for ELL-SWD’s to ensure that all IEP mandates are being met and to ensure that the ELL-SWD student receives the appropriate program in the least restrictive environment. After reviewing the mandates of the IEP, the full team of teachers meet with the Special Education teacher to discuss specific instructional strategies that would prove valuable to the growth of the ELL-SWD student and follow the mandates of the IEP. The team along with the guidance counselor, Assistant Principal and Special Education teacher ensure that all of the mandates in the IEP are carried out. If additional support is needed the student is provided with additional support services as per the IEP. Requests are made, as needed, for assistive technology such as I pads outfitted with speaking technology for a student whose speech is effected by paralysis. The ELL-SWD students who may have learning needs undiagnosed in their home country, have been here a short time and are only beginning to learn English, and/or have experienced serious disruptions and inadequacies in their earlier academic preparation are addressed by creating instructional opportunities geared to their needs. Students with Individualized Education Plans (IEP's) receive full support from the instructional teams to which they belong. Those students are included in 4  mainstream classes, and receive additional services in language, counseling, and adaptive physical education. In biweekly meetings, the teachers of our instructional teams meet to review the progress of these and other students. Teams of teachers along with the guidance counselors meet regularly throughout the semester to review the progress of each student in accordance with their specific IEP. . Some of the specific instructional strategies for ELLs depending on the requirements of their specific IEP’s include: Teachers, guidance counselors and special education teacher meet regularly to discuss the individual needs of the ELL-SWD student. Once students have been identified as ELL-SWD and a program has been established following the mandates of their IEP, the challenge is to find ways to teach the student the skills they require while also teaching the student to read, write and speak English and acquire content knowledge when they may have limited, if any academic skills, have specific disabilities as described in their IEP and may have serious affective issues as well. In order to service the ELL-SWD student in the least restrictive environment, students are mainstreamed into the regular academic class and each team provides extra services: including one-on-one work with a paraprofessional, small group instruction and after school tuturing. School-wide, a Saturday enrichment program has been established, and changes in student programs are made to allow the student time to meet with the necessary special service provider depending on the students specific needs. Other strategies include scaffolding students’ work in the regular heterogeneous classes for most of the school day by developing collaboration between the special education teacher or service provider and the content area teachers. A team teaching approach would be used in which the special education teacher plans with the content area teachers to map out strategies an best practices and to access the students strengths and area which still need improvement. If necessary, ELL-SWD students are expected to attend extra after school home work sessions and are also enrolled in our weekly Saturday Explorers Literacy Program which servies to enhance their literacy skills through exploration of NYC and its environment. Finally, the utilization of technology--Reading Plus program as well as aps chosen by our Special Education teacher on our I pads. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 8. The Manhattan International HS uses a variety of curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWD’s to attain their IEP goals within the least restrictive environment. Once students are identified ELL-SWD’s our challenge is to find ways to teach students according to the mandates of their IEP’s in the least restrictive setting. The team meets with our Special Education teacher or service provider depending on the needs of that student's particular IEP in order to determine the best instructional strategies to meet the needs of that student according to their IEP. In order to service students who are struggling, each team has provided extra services: including one-on-one work with a paraprofessional, small group instruction, and after school tutoring. School-wide, a Saturday enrichment program has been established, and changes in student programs (such as an extra language arts period) have been made. By adapting curriculum to enable those students to succeed, by expanding the time available to team members to work with them individually, and by using the resources of paraprofessionals and student teachers, they are supported in meeting the graduation certification requirements. Our plan maintains that our future students with IEP’s will receive additional academic assistance in accordance with the particular needs of their individualized IEP’s. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All of our targeted intervention program are geared towards supporting all of our ELL subgroups; teachers running these programs implement the “Internationals Approach” in all of them: • Saturday Literacy Program (Explorer’s Club/ENL)—classes will meet a total of 30 sessions beginning in September, through mid June, from 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 P.M. 12-15 students will be served. Group size will be maintained at 6-7 students per teacher. This class will be targeted to Entering and Emerging level students only. Certified ESL teachers along with content area teachers will provide supplemental instruction in alignment with the New York City and New York State content and performance standards. Instruction will focus on developing skills in both English and Math Literacy using English acquisition through new vocabulary learning, oral practice through discussions, learning map skills (with NYC land mark and subway system), and cultural/historical exploration, and conduct interview, journal writing during and after the trip. These strategies will help students achieve higher scores on the NYSESLAT. Students create a brochure “Places to go in New York City” by the 5  end of the year. For some of the sessions, students first meet a 9 a.m. to do classroom work and go off on trips visiting various museums and land marks in NYC. In addition to 2 teachers, instructional material, general classroom supply, and snacks will be purchased to support the Saturday Academy. • Enrichment class—All ELL students receive targeted intervention enrichment classes in literacy and math which meet four times per week for 60 minutes throughout the year during the regular school day. This class will be targeted to Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding level students. In 9 th grade this class focuses on Numeracy and in 9-12 Literacy. Certified ESL teachers along with content area teachers will provide supplemental instruction in alignment with the New York City and New York State content and performance standards. Instruction will focus on developing skills in both English and Math Literacy work on students portfolio projects and oral presentations. • SIFE ENL Literacy class---We currently have three after school groups targeting these students: One targets Spanish speakers, one is a general converation class and one targets reading and writing. Instruction covers second language acquisition to improve literacy performance through new vocabulary learning, pronunciation, read-out loud, oral practice through conversation and discussion, and sentence structure. Two classes, each consisting of 10 students and meeting for 50 sessions in total, meet 4 times a week for 70 minutes each, from late September to early June. This class will target Entering and Emerging level students to help them improve on the NYSESLAT. Instructional material, general classroom supplies and snacks will be purchased to support this class. • SIFE Math Literacy class- specially addresses instruction in math literacy during 9 th grade as well as in second language acquisition to improve math literacy performance through classroom discussion of mathematical concepts and word problems, vocabulary learning, pronunciation and oral practice through conversation and discussion. Two classes each consisting of 10 students and meeting for 50 sessions in total, 4 times a week for 70 minutes each, from late September to early June. This class will target Entering and Emerging level students to help them improve both on the Integrated Algebra Regents as well as the NYSESLAT. Instructional material, general classroom supplies and snacks will be purchased to support this class. • Year Book---This class will improve literacy skill and performance of 15-20 Transitioning and Expanding level students through English language development through hands-on, activity-based sessions with student discussion, writing text & captions, and designing layouts and proofing and editing all written work. Thus, students’ English language development is enhanced. Students will meet 30 sessions, once a week for 70 minutes from late September to early June. Student will publish annual school year book in spring and produce digital year book at the end of the year. Software, General supply, snack will be purchased to support this class. • Big Brother, Big Sister Mentoring and NY Cares Community Service groups—ELL students have opportunities to do community service, research projects, and leadership training. This will culminate in their understanding of social issues that pertain to immigrant populations and thus enhance cultural awareness, social learning and a positive adjustment to American society. Over the past few years our students and staff have worked with a variety of outside community based organizations. Currently 25 ELL students are participating in an internship/career readiness program with each of the above organization. Over the past years participants in these programs identified, planned and implemented projects covering themes such as: 1) preventing bias, sexism and racism through dialogue facilitation, 2) Helping tenants know their rights regarding housing issues, 3) Preserving our water and keeping it clean, 4) Providing Resources to increase literacy in your Native Language, 5) Young Immigrants and Access to Financial Aid, 6). Our staff will be trained by the two organizations. Several of our teachers will spend forty hours in total in support of partnership work with community organizations. These are all supplemental activities which will aid our students in acquiring English through a variety of community involvement activities. This targeted intervention targets students in all content areas but gives special emphasis to the content area of Social Studies. Before/After School Tutoring-content area teachers in Social Studies, the students native language, English, Math and Science. Content area teachers in Social Studies, English, Math and Science provide support to students in all sub-groups in small group settings for one to two hours per week. Although all students may avail themselves of Before/After School tutoring the main ELL sub-gropus which are targeted are the SIFE studetns, Newcomers and ELL-SWD students. This not only includes students who are having difficulties with their class work but also provides assistance for students who are working on their 10th grade and Senior Graduation portfolio projects which include their social studies research paper, native language project, math project, science project, English literary essay, creative project as well as their mastery statement. These classes are taught by licensed pedagogues in the content area. Native language support is provided to students in all of the above mentioned 6  intervention programs through the use of paraprofessionals, bilingual pedagogues, student peer and college mentors who share a common native language. In addition, bilingual dictionaires and multi-lingual computer software are utilized as well. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Due to the success of our new Literacy classes we will continue to refine the curriculum so that it provides a "toolbox" of literacy strategies that are reinforced throughout the classes in each team. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not plan to make any cuts in our programs or services pending any change in the budget. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Since approximately 70% of our students are ELLs and the remainder are former ELLs, all school programs are “equal access.” In addition to the support and intervention services listed in the answer to question five of this section, we have the following after-school classes; while they may not all be “academic” in theme, all of them are designed to continue students’ language development through activities incorporating listening, speaking, reading, and writing of English: Arts and Technology Partnerships: Family Cook Productions, Magicbox Productions, Beam Center, ScriptEd, Reelworks Film • SAT Prep • French Heritage • Student Government • NYC Police Explorers • Project Adventure • YMCA Leadership/College Prep • Dream Team • Theater • Green Team • Mouse Squad • Ping Pong All ELLs and former ELLs are invited to participate in the activities listed above at the time that they register for classes each semester. At registration they meet with their guidance counselor and teachers on their instructional team who describe the different activities. Students make a selection with the assistance of their teachers. Since 100% of our students are either ELLs or former ELLs the representation by ELLs in all of our school programs is substantial. Funding sources for after school and supplemental services offered to ELL’s in our school: Since our school funds are conceptually consolidated, the funding source for most of our after school targeted interventions listed in section 9 above and many of those listed in this section are covered by Title III funding as well as tax levy funding. The SIFE literacy and SIFE math classes which are held during the regular school day are currently funded exclusively with tax levy funds. The funding for the enrichment class is also covered by regular tax levy funding since it takes place during the regular school day. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. It is our school's mission to ensure our immigrant adolescent population is offered appropriate instructional materials and supports that meet their needs and that exceeds standards. All standards-based curriculum used is teacher created and constantly adapted, after careful diagnostics, to ensure we meet the diverse needs of our students. During the 2016-17 school year, our school received the APPLE ConnectED Grant, which was awarded to 114 underserved schools across the country. To support ELLs now we have an iPad to every student, a Mac and iPad to every teacher, and an Apple TV to every classroom. We also have a process that provides planning, professional learning, and ongoing guidance to support our experience with 7  the transformational power of technology. We are currently using 45 new apps within our curricula to enhace the teaching and learning of ELLS. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? How students’ home language skills are being used for instructional purposes: All our students participate in our language development/ENL program. All of our classes use the native language to support learning. As described above, the locus of control over language use resides with our students and they use both English and their native languages to discover and develop content. Some projects every year are done in the native languages and in English and students are supported in developing their native languages to the greatest extent possible. Students are supported by peers, community partners, family members and/or school personnel. Native language skills are a valued aspect of all subject area classes. Students are required to complete a Native language project as one component of their graduation portfolio. This native language project is a research project on their neighborhood where they consider the census data, historical information, do a photo essay and interview a long time resident. These projects are shared in oral presentations and will also be turned into a book to be shared with the community. This capstone project is typical of the culture and respect for Native Language in our community. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our instructional teams meet regularly to ensure that required services and supports correspond to ELLs' age and grade levels. All of the required services for high school-aged ELLs are available to students. We use a wide array of resources in our school including teacher-made materials, text books on a range of levels, trade books at many reading levels, and a large variety of non-text hands-on materials. In addition, our school has wireless access in all classrooms and students use the Internet to access resources. If a teacher or instructional team is having problems locating published materials that are appropriate to the age of the ELLs then the instructional teams work together to create an adapt material which will be appropriate to the age level of the ELL. Our teachers understand the importance of utilizing materials and resources for the ELL’s appropriate age level in order to keep them engaged in learning. In addition, instructional teams are encouraged to attend professional development workshops throughout the year in order to help them better meet the needs of ELLs with age and grade level appropriate to the content of the classes. In addition we were selected to receive a ConnectEd Apple grant which will provide 1:1 I pads for our students. In preparation for this we have been exploring a variety of new technologies, such as I movie, coggle, schoology, and bulb. We find that use of technology allows us to scaffold and differentiate to support all students. Our arts and technology partnerships create opportunities for students to shine in a variety of ways. For example through filmmaking, coding, cooking or theatre students who may struggle academically gain confidence and can demonstrate abilities outside of the standard academic skills. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our building was redesigned in 1995 from a single school into small autonomous learning communities. We hold a multi-age and multi-service learning community with a strong commitment to special building wide programs and shared common spaces (cafeterias, gymnasiums, art and dance rooms, auditoriums, yard, etch. Our schools' principals meet weekly to support thoughtful planning and building wide collaboration. The scheduling of shared common places is discussed and agreed upon twice a year. We respect each other's needs and flexibly accommodate to ensure our communities grow and strive. As the Manhattan International High School and with over 50 countries represented amongst our student population, our community is well supported and respected. We also engage in academic projects with our neighbor schools sharing about diversity. . 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Prior to the school year, new ELL students are assigned to attend an introductory two day orientation session at the beginning of the school year. Students receive a tour of the school facilities and take part in ice breaker activities in an effort to become more comfortable with the high school environment. During that orientation new students are assessed as to their English 8  language abilities. New students are assigned to heterogeneous teams (or clusters) with, as far as practicable, students who speak their native language. The new students are then paired with more experienced students who are responsible for escorting them to class and lunch, making sure they know how to get home, explaining school rules and customs, and acting as their translator and advocate in class. During this time a meeting is held with the parents of incoming ELLs to provide them with an understanding of the resources available to them at the school as well as within the community. Many similar activities take place when ELL students enroll throughout the school year. When a new student enrolls they meet with their guidance counselor and, along with the assistance of a translator, receive a one on one orientation to the school and the community. Just as with the students who began in September, students who enroll throughout the year are paired with more experienced students who are responsible for escorting them to class and lunch, making sure they know how to get home, explaining school rules and customs, and acting as their translator and advocate in class. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The Manhattan International HS awards six high school credits in the student’s native language as per Part 100 of Commissioner’s Regulations NYS, Section 100.5. which is based on students previous language experience in their native country plus the completion of a native language project as a part of their graduation portfolio. In addition, our students have the opportunity to participate in an afterschool program in partnership with the French Heritage Association where they prepare to take the French AP exam as well as participating in cultural activities and an exchange with Lycee Francais. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. Professional Development Plan: To achieve our instructional goals and implement our core beliefs an extensive structure of professional development has been planned. This professional development structure is on-going and fully integrated into our school structure. The principal repository of professional development has been the instructional teams in the school. Our entire school is divided into four team learning communities. Each team is comprised of five teachers and approximately eighty students. There is one 9 th grade team, two mixed 10 th /11 th grade teams and a Senior team. The teachers meet weekly to plan, develop and implement their curriculum and instruction. Teams typically interview and hire their team members, and meet at the beginning of the year to help each other develop goals. They develop and revise curriculum and model collaborative work for their students. Teachers also meet in discipline groups to share student work and curriculum. They are also sharing strategies for maintaining project-based curriculum with meeting the demands of the Regents exams. Most members of the Manhattan International faculty take on responsibility for committee work by serving as Discipline Chairs, organizing after school clubs, being a Cluster Representative, organizing school wide events or student activities. The faculty run committees plan and coordinate staff development day activities, which focus on improving instruction. Faculty 9  meetings have also had workshops in the areas of crisis management run by our counselors from Support Services. ELL techniques, literacy and native language Instruction workshops, and technology shares were also led by staff members. Our SIFE Leadership team meets regularly to discuss curriculum issues and students’ progress within the program. In addition, members of the SIFE Leadership team have run workshops to share techniques on meeting the variety of literacy challenges faced by teachers of ELLs. We continue to work closely with academic experts exploring several approaches in order to develop a toolbox of strategies that all of our teachers can use with students and share throughout content areas. We have PD meetings every Thursday from 2:15-3:15pm, some examples of recent and upcomings topics include: Restorative Justice training, Smartboard Instuction, Reading Plus training, Mastery Based grading PD. For this year’s goals, the instructional teams met and completed the following school wide goals to help them address the Common Core Learning Standards. Category: Language and Content Integration: Goal 1: To create units that help students develop disciplinary and interdisciplinary academic language. Category: Localized Autonomy and Responsibility: Goal #2: To develop students’ skills towards the higher levels of the New York State Performance Standards Consortium’s rubric in each discipline area and to work with students on their personal and academic strengths and weaknesses through projects. In order to assist our teachers of ELLs in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards we have planned to offer the multiple opportunities for professional development throughout the year. These professional development sessions are facilitated by fellow faculty members and school administrators. 1. Classroom Environment and Assessment: (Planned for: September 8, 2015) • Supporting SIFE and IEP students to access a rigorous curriculum • Building a supportive classroom environment from the start • NYS Performance Standards Consortium (NYSPSC) Portfolio Rubrics: Getting students to understand them and using them throughout the year as an assessment tool • Using baseline and benchmark assessments that are aligned to the Common Core 2. Alignment of Curriculum Meetings (Twelve meetings planned for year: 9/16, 9/30, 10/7, 10/21, 11/11, 11/18, 12/3, 1/13, 2/10, 3/9, 4/6, 5/11) • Sharing unit maps and getting feedback on how to improve use of discipline specific academic language • Sharing baseline and benchmark assessments and getting feedback on how to develop students; skills towards higher levels of NYSPSC rubric in discipline area • Sharing syllabus and getting feedback on coherent curriculum throughout the year that builds on portfolio skills. 3. Curriculum Sharing: (Planned for: January 5, 2016) • All teachers bring portfolio project task and sample student work to share • Collect feedback on how well project allowed for students to reach higher levels of the NYSPSC rubric, and how project in the future can be improved to allow for students to reach high levels of the rubric. 3. Portfolio Project Inter-Rater Reliability: • Norming of portfolio rubrics for each project. As with all staff, our Guidance Counselor attends meetings especially for GC's organized through the Internationals Network for Public schools as well as The Consortium. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 3. Support Provided to Staff to Assist ELL's Transitioning from middle school to high school: Professional development for all staff at The Manhattan International HS is geared toward improving ELL academic achievement and language development; we build teacher capacity in these areas by a variety of means: a. Peer observations: teachers observe each other teach and write reflective letters pinpointing new strategies and techniques they have learned as a result. 0  b. Conferences: faculty attend a variety of external conferences each year in order to keep abreast of new trends in ESL and their content areas. c. Q-TEL/OELL trainings: Our classroom teachers are encouraged to complete workshops with QTEL and other OELL offerings, which highlight best practices, like scaffolding and differentiation, for working with ELLs in the content areas. d. RFP PD Projects: small self-selected groups of teachers engage in action research projects throughout the year in order to learn more about specific ESL methodologies and strategies in order to enhance student achievement; all faculty present findings and recommendations to the rest of the staff so that all may benefit from the work of the rest. e. The Internationals' Network for Public Schools New Teacher Summer PD: This two day workshop introduces new International High School teachers to best practices and ESL methodologies per CR Part 154.2 g. Formative Assessment: our staff participates in ongoing professional development throughout the school year in developing and refining formative assessments for our school (in conjunction with the NYS Performance Standards Consortium.) 4. Minimum ELL Training for all staff: All of our teaching staff, which includes teachers who do not hold ESL or Bilingual licenses, are provided with a series of professional opportunities at Manhattan International High School. The professional development program focuses on providing teachers with various instructional strategies for teaching English Language Learners. It also focuses on how to prepare ELLs to meet and exceed the NYC and NYS performance and learning Standards. These professional development sessions are facilitated by fellow faculty members and school administrators. 1. Two 2-hour session on supporting SIFE and IEP students to access a rigorous curriculum (Planned for: September 8, 2015) 2. One 1-hour session on Academic language for ELL students: (Planned for: October 6, 2015) • Introduction on language development and our students • Sharing unit maps on teams and coming up with interdisciplinary academic language that the team can focus on together with ELL students. 3. Two-2 hour sessions on Language and Content Integration for ELLs: (Planned for: Nov. 3, 2015) • Various language and content integration workshops led by the Internationals Network for Public Schools 4. One 1-hour session using SMART board to build entry point for all ELL students (Planned for November 24, 2015) 5. Two-2 hour session on Language and Content Integration for ELLs: (Planned for February 1, 2016) • Strategies in the classroom integrating language and content • Strategies: -The Language Experience Approach -Vanishing Cloze -Joint Sentence Construction 5. One 1- hour session: Native language Use in the Classroom (Planned for March 1, 2016) • How to incorporate native language and use it as a support for students in the classroom 6. One 1- hour session: Let’s Give ‘Em Something to Talk About: Language and Content Integration: (Planned for April 5, 2016) • Social and Academic language sentence matching • Barrier crossword • Word matching (Nominalization) • Cause and Effect Sentence Combining In addition, our staff participates in the Internationals Network for Public Schools Professional Development workshops: at three different points throughout the year our entire staff will meet with their peers from our sister International High Schools and attend workshops designed specifically for educators of recent immigrant ELL students. Topics will include scaffolding 1  instruction, differentiation of instruction, ENL methodologies, SIFE students, meeting the affective needs of immigrant children, and language development. Other members of our non-teaching staff also attend staff development training. Our school secretaries and parent coordinator take part in many of the above mentioned staff development activities along with teachers. In addition, our secretaries attend DOE sponsored staff development for secretaries on Election day and our Parent Coordinator attends the mandatory two day Respect for all Anti-Harassment Initiative to prevent bullying and bias related incidents. Since all of our staff participates in the above-mentioned professional development opportunities throughout the school year, plus many more staff members avail themselves of the professional development opportunities listed in part 2 above, everyone receives many more hours than the current 50% mandated total for bi-lingual/ESL teachers. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We will hold annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs at least one time during each school year, in addition to the four regular parent teacher conferences. At these meetings teachers will discuss the goals of the program, the language development process of the individual student, the language proficiaency assessment resluts as well as the student's language development needs in all content areas. At this meeting we will have content area teachers, the student counselor, and a school staff member to translate as needed. If no staff member is able to translate than we will utilize the DOE Translation Unit to hold over the phone translations. The Manhattan International High School has teachers working collaboratively on five interdisciplinary teams. Each of the teams meet together to discuss students' language development and content knowledge progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs during their weekly two hour meeting. Each interdisciplinary team has 40 minutes of their weekly team time to utilize for parent involvement time. This period of time which is within the teacher's contractual day is specifically set aside for meetings with parents of ELL's. Our parent coordinator assists with placing phone calls to parents to schedule meetings. 2. In order to ensure that parent needs are accomodated we will utilize our faculty members in order to make phone calls to parents to arrange individual meetings. When a faculty member is not available to translate we will utiize the DOE Translation Unit to ensure that all parents receive information about their individual parent meeting in their native langauge. Our five interdisciplinary teams will work with parents schedules to coordinate the best time for the individual parent meetings. Upon parents arrival to school, they will sign in on a computer in the admin office with translation help when needed. Teams will document which parents attend their meetings and will make follow up outreach to any parents who have not been able to attend a scheduled meeting. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The Manhattan International High School provides all parents including ELL parents/guardians with the opportunity to attend a variety of literacy, math, and homework workshops, so that they can better assist in the education and learning or their children at home. Parent Workshops---A series of 2-hour workshops will be held on different topics of interest to our parents. Each year our PTA assembles of list of suggested topics and the school does its utmost to accommodate these workshop requests. This year some possible topics and projected dates based on parent feedback include: • One 2-hour session on how parents can help their children to succeed in high school and introducing parents to the International HS instructional model. (Planned for September 2015). • One 2-hour session on the College Application process and how to deal with financial aid forms and college financial aid bureaucracy. (Planned for October, 2015). One 1-hour sessions to: a) Title I Annual Parent Meeting; (Planned for November 2015). 2  • Two 2-hour session on the communication and relationship between parents and their teens. (Planned: December, 2015) • One 2-hour sessions on how parents can use Jumprope as a tool to keep up with how their child is doing in school. (Planned for: February, 2016). • One 2-hour session on protecting you against job and housing discrimination and your rights. • One 2-hour session on how to support students with issues of cultural adjustment and second language learning. (Planned for April 2016). • One 2-hour session on awareness of gangs and how to keep your child safe and warning signs of bullying. (Planned for May, 2016) Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Gladys Rodriguez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Manhattan International HS School DBN: 2M429 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Gladys Dorilda Rodriguez Principal Assistant Principal Daira Olivero Parent Coordinator Moses Ahn ENL/Bilingual Teacher Juseph Tugutu Parent Nina Kogut / ESL Social Studies Teacher/Subject Area Gallia Kassiano /ESL ELA Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Alli Kiniasz School Counselor Kathy Rehfield- Pelles Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other 7/23/15 7/23/15 7/23/15 7/23/15 7/23/15 7/23/15 7/23/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 7/23/15 7/23/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M459 School Name: Manhattan International HS Superintendent: Kathy Pelles The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Daira Olivero Parent Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data used to access our school’s written translation and oral interpretation needs include data found from a variety of sources. The parent surveys and parent selection forms gathered from student permanent records and from those filled out by parents when students entering the NYC schools for the first time. We also utilize information gathered from Part III of the Home Language Survey (HLIS), ATS reports, and Student Emergency Contact cards, Language Allocation Policy, the School Parent Compact, and the School Parent Involvement Policy. The policy of Manhattan International High School is to provide all parents with written translation and oral interpretations through all means available to us. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 6  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral AMHARIC (AKA ETHIOPIAN) ALBANIAN ARABIC BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) BAMBARA CHINESE ANY CANTONESE CROATIAN FRENCH GEORGIAN HAITIAN CREOLE HINDI HAUSA ITALIAN KOREAN LAO MALAGASY MANDARIN NEPALI ENGLISH PILIPINO (A.K.A. TAGALOG) PUNJABI (A.K.A. PANJABI) POLISH PORTUGUESE RUSSIAN SPANISH THAI TIBETAN TIGRINYA TWI URDU WOLOF 1 8 39 25 3 9 0 1 28 1 4 2 1 2 1 3 1 0 8 68 1 2 3 5 5 269 1 5 1 1 2 3 0.2 1.59 7.75 4.97 0.6 1.79 0 0.2 5.57 0.2 0.8 0.4 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.6 0.2 0 1.59 13.52 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.99 0.99 53.48 0.2 0.99 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.6 1 8 38 25 3 3 3 1 25 1 4 2 2 2 1 3 1 3 8 74 1 2 3 5 5 266 1 5 1 1 2 3 0.2 1.59 7.55 4.97 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.2 4.97 0.2 0.8 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.2 0.6 0.2 0.6 1.59 14.71 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.99 0.99 52.88 0.2 0.99 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.6 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 7  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. New parent handbook June & September Parent-teacher conference announcements- New York State Regents testing dates . PTA announcements- Orientation letter to new students Credit letter and summer dates- Notification letter for first day of school Notification letter for new parent orientation PTA parent newsletter Letters of concern about grades or permission slips for tutoring Early September, Mid-October, Early March, Mid-April Early January, Early June Monthly Early July and early August. March Teachers who speak a language other than English NYCDOE Translation 8  and Interpretation Unit July September and February Monthly Ongoing 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Parent Teacher Conference NYCDOE Dates Family night PTA meetings Monthly Early College Meeting NYCDOE Dates plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Teachers who speak a language other than English NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit 9  Individual meetings with parents of all ENL students-Throughout the year Spring Term New Parent Orientation-August and February Ongoing August & February 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school uses its own teachers who speak a language other than English to work work with families. Currently amongst faculty and staff, we have the following languages: Spanish, Polish, Mandarin, Cantonese, Arabic, Italian, Tagalog, French, Wolof and Korean. We also use the NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit to help with other limited-English-proficient families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff members receive a copy of the Chancellor's Regulation A-663 in the beginning of the school year along with an updated roster of students with their home language identification. Our staff works very carefully in identifying and planning for the diverse language backgrounds of our students. Our school ensures that language assistance assessments are in place and provides centrally produced and student specific critical documents as required. Our parent coordinator attends trainings and assists our school community with this task. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 0  Manhattan International High School takes the responsibility of providing each parent with written translation and oral interpretation services extremely seriously. Every effort is made to ensure that parents whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services in the appropriate covered receive those services as well as instructions on how to obtain such services. -When a parent enters the school they are greeted by a parent welcome poster conspicuously posted outside the main office. -When a parent enters the main office a language ID guide is clearly posted at the security desk as well as in the main office. -At the new parent orientation meetings in August and February parents are provided with the Parents' Guide to Language Access. Copies of the guide are also distributed to parents at the four parent conferences throughout the school year. In addition, copies of the guide are posted in the main office where translations are made available as needed. -Notification to our parents is made in a variety of ways. Our parent coordinator provides monthly newsletters in all the covered languages as well as in a variety of primary languages providing notification of their rights. This information is also provided to parents at several points throughout the year. The Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselors hold an orientation for new parents twice a year in August and in February through the Parent Association which informs parents of their rights in terms of translation and interpretation services. Translators are provided at each of these meetings. The information is also provided to parents through our telephone messenger system which sends out the messages in a variety of languages. Parents are also informed of the translation and translation services at all four parent teacher conferences held in September, November, March and in May. • The information is to be posted in a conspicuous location near the primary entrance to the high school in the covered languages. This notification indicates that a copy of the written notification of the parent’s Bill of Rights regarding language assistance services and translation services are available from the Parent Coordinator in the main office, room 152. • Manhattan International High School’s safety plan will contain procedures in order to ensure that parents in need of language assistance services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. • “Each school at which the parents of more than 10% of the children at such school speak a primary language that is neither English nor a covered language shall obtain from the Translation and interpretation Unit a translation into such language of the signage and forms required pursuant to this section and shall post and provide such forms in accordance with this section.” At Manhattan International High School the only languages spoken by over 10% of the students are covered languages. (Spanish and Chinese). • International High School will provide information in each of the covered languages concerning the rights of parents to translation and interpretation services and how to access such services on its school website. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services the school will assess the answers parents provide in the school survey about whether or not the school is communicating with the parent in their native 1  language. Parents who attend monthly PTA meeting will be asked to provide feedback on how well the school is providing parents with both written and oral translation services. In addition, whenever our parent coordinator communicates with parents she will request feedback on ways to improve communication and availability of translation services. 2 
