 02M500 School Name: UNITY CENTER FOR URBAN TECHNOLOGIES Principal: FAUSTO DE LA ROSA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Section 1: School Information Page School Information Unity Center for Urban Technologies O2M500 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 310200011500 9-12 111 East 33rd Street 212 576 0530 School Number (DBN): 212 576 0561 Fax: Wanda Rosado Wrosado2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 2 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Faustode la Rosa DelroyWalker HeidySantos Faustode la Rosa Angel Reyes XhoananaBinoshaj n/a District Information Vivian Orlen Superintendent: 333 7th Avenue vorlen@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 356-3899 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: YuetChu Executive Director: 333 7th Avenue YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: | 646-470-0721 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Faustode la Rosa DelroyWalker HeidySantos AnabellaBaksh FranciaAlmanzar Angel Reyes XhoananaBinoshaj Maria Prieto AgustinaStamoulis Bianca Ronquillo *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ teacher Member/ parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Miguel Garcia Business Manager/DC37 Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of Unity Center for Urban Technologies is to prepare each of our students for academic success in a globally and technologically demanding world with a high demand for innovative solutions to the challenges facing communities in urban communities.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Unity Center for Urban Technologies is a small school where the principal communicates high expectations and fosters a positive culture to all members of the school community. We strive to build a group of teachers who engage in working and learning together for the betterment of their craft but most importantly their students. Using the Danielson Framework for Teachers, administrators give teachers relevant feedback, including specific and measurable recommendations for next steps to improve the instruction core. At Unity Center for Urban Technologies the all faculty examine their scholarship reports, set goals, and develop action plans. We corroborate with a Teaching Matters consultant and Office of Superintendent coaches to meet the specific planning and preparation needs of our teachers. Assistant principals also, perform the role of instructional coaches to support and strengthen teachers’ instructional practices during professional learning periods and advisory. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. For the past few years we have had an influx of students with IEP’s and long term ENL's. This has impacted our small school because we have had to be more cognizant of maintaining the rigor of instruction in our classrooms for all students while meeting the increasing need to provide for their individual needs of this population. We are working to improve collaboration among general education teachers, special education teachers and our English as a New Language teacher. The administration works with teachers to understand how they are evaluated through the Danielson Framework in order to improve their use of assessments to collect data about student progress and achievement, improve curriculum through appropriate rigor and CCLS-alignment and provide students with the appropriate socio-emotional supports with their AIS and improve communication with families and communities to provide additional student support. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. At Unity Center for Urban Technologies we have made progress in building capacity by building a team of collaborative teachers. Our teachers lead inquiry during the common period and we participated in the borough ); all in an effort to promote teacher leadership and provide targeted ENL support. Teacher teams look at student work and collaborate to see how as a result of this inquiry they can adjust and/or improve their instruction. A continued area of focus for the 2018-19 academic school year is to establish a clearly “articulated set of beliefs and alignment to curricula…” that is reflected in student work [products] that demonstrates high level thinking and rigor throughout all content areas. As stated in our last Quality Review " during an English Language Arts (ELA) teacher team meeting, the inquiry team maintained an instructional focus of increasing student engagement through content-specific writing by looking at examples of student work focusing on citing and analyzing evidence." This year we will expand our our second year teachers to understand how they are evaluated through the Danielson Framework, improve their use of questioning and assessments to collect data about student progress and achievement, We will continue to improve our collaboration with AP for All to provide vertical alignment of the rigorous curriculum in all our five AP courses. We will continue to shift student mindsets by providing students with the appropriate socio-emotional supports (i.e. Mindfulness Yoga Project) and improve communication with families and communities to provide additional student support. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M500 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 255 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 5 4 5 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 29 19 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 84.3% % Reduced Lunch 7.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 59.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.13 7% 21% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 83% 72% 76.7% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 88 67 81.5% 4.3% 24.7% 29.4% 3.9% 4.3% 4 7% 7.3 N/A N/A 83% 79% 81.0% 4% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our School Quality Snapshot for 2017-2018 report data shows a graduation rate of 86%. The data shows that we have increased the percentage of students graduating and enrolling in college. However, we need to make greater efforts to make sure our students are college and career ready. Our goal is to have our students exposed to more rigorous courses in order to prepare them for college and career readiness by increasing the rigor in our instruction to close the gap of our students by the time they are seniors. Currently, we offer four advanced placement courses: AP Environmental Science, AP Language and Communications, AP Statistics, and AP US. History. For the 2018-2019 school year we are adding AP Literature and Communication. All of our 11th graders are expected to take two AP courses this academic school year. The administrators and counselors review cohort data every marking period. Teachers are expected to increase student expectation and accountability and be more of a facilitator in the classroom. In order to ensure that our curriculum (scope and sequence and unit plans) is aligned to the CCLS the school we use NYCDOE Core Curriculum: Collections for all grade levels of ELA and the NYS Education Department Engage NY modules for all mathematics. As part of the city-wide AP for All initiative our teachers take part in week long training sessions and year-long professional development. We continue to work with the Teaching Matters Organization in order to develop our professional learning culture around the implementing strategies and the use of data and formative and summative assessments in instruction. The Teaching Matters coach also assists teachers with on-going individualized professional development. Strengths:  Continuous revision of curriculum as departments; providing actionable feedback to one another. Teachers use the same lesson plan template to create uniformity in the work that they do in planning and preparation. (Danielson 1e--Designing Coherent Instruction)  Classroom instruction that supports student citing textual evidence in writing and in classroom discourse.  Use of teacher vetted academic vocabulary across all content areas in order to increase reading comprehension  Using instructional strategies that support the instructional focus of increasing student engagement in classroom discussions. 2   AP for All , Teaching Matters, and teacher-led professional learning sessions throughout the school year. Needs: We need to integrate instructional strategies into the curricula that not only provide multiple entry points but uses extensions to “ engage higher-level learners” and provide more “students to demonstrate their thinking and engage in peer to peer discussions.” Our professional learning sessions are scheduled into the school day to support ongoing revision of curriculum and supporting increased teacher effectiveness, increased student questioning and discussion techniques and the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the June 2019, all teachers will prepare at least three unit plans that scaffold learning through specific instructional strategies and questions using highly effective language ( as referenced in the Depth of Knowledge tool) to provide students multiple opportunities to engage in academic discourse and writing. Unit plans will be incorporate culturally relevant instruction. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will participate in professional learning sessions around the Danielson Framework, 3b, 3c, and 3d (Instructional Core) and continue to norm their practice around cognitively challenging instruction that supports our instructional focus. Teachers will create lessons using questions that promote higher level thinking. Lessons Studies will be part of our professional learning followed by departmental inter-visitations every teacher in the department will be at least twice a year. Revise/create unit plans that are CCLS aligned in ELA and math and are indicative of instructional shifts and multiple entry points that are differentiated for: SWD’s, ELL’s, and high performers. Lessons will take into consideration our diverse population. Teachers will be engage in at least six cycles of Collaborative Inquiry and classroom walk-throughs that have targeted lens: student engagement, supporting students and content-specific writing, and culturally relevant pedagogy. All teachers, students September 2018-June 2019 Assistant principal, Teaching Matters consultant, teachers All teacher, counselors Teachers, students September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, administration September 2018-June 2019 Assistant principal, Teaching Matters consultant Assistant principal, Teaching Matters consultant, teacher leads Assistant principal, Teaching Matters consultant, teacher leads 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families and provide support of their understanding of rigorous instruction and the Common Core through informative correspondence (via e-mail and or USPS) There will be workshops led by the parent coordinator and guidance counselors regarding the expectations for their children. Counselors will meet with teachers once a marking period to discuss at student progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Teaching Matters organization works with our teachers as a consultant. The consultant provides professional development guided around our instructional focus once a week. Teachers meet during the common planning period that has been incorporated into the teacher schedule that permits them to meet and discuss and share instructional 4  strategies that best help engage our students in their learning. This common planning period allows for teachers to meet consistently to support each other in improving our school community and culture. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Midpoint benchmarks occur at the end of each marking period when teachers meet with the principal to review scholarship and the impact of periodic assessments. It is expected that teachers provide a scholarship action plan each marking period that indicates the systems in place to help the students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Grade data, , Regents data, AP course data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? School teams will develop school-wide policies that serve to close the achievement gap and prepare students for college and career as referenced in the High school Quality Snapshot for 2017-2018. The SIT and PPC teams will meet periodically to design and discuss academic interventions and outreach intervention for lowest performing students and increase completion of approved college courses. Team leaders and the assistant principal will develop a protocol for identifying at-risk students to ensure that interventions. This school year teachers will lead Equity team and provide students with the appropriate academic and socio-emotional supports, as well as, improve communication with families and communities. This selected group of at risk students will work with this program’s facilitator on de-stressing mechanisms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, protocols will be established to monitor academic intervention and socio-emotional support of at-risk student population in order to increase credit accumulation and participation in college readiness opportunities and monitor attendance. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Counselors and deans conduct behavioral intervention and NYCDOE Discipline Code workshops for targeted groups of students. At risk ninth and tenth graders Counselors will meet with targeted parents and students to discuss status of credit accumulation and create an action plan which includes college courses courses. Parents will receive periodic reports via mail to help them monitor their children’s progress. Parents and students access daily progress through on line grading policy Jupiter Grades. At-risk students in each grade level At-risk students October 2018-June 2019 October 2018-June 2019 October 2018-June 2019 Deans, counselors, attendance teacher. Parent Coordinator Counselors, attendance teacher, parents Counselors, attendance teacher, parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to engage families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Fair Student Funding (Tax Levy) and Title I funding will be used for academic and attendance outreach. We will continue to work with p targeted group of students. We will continue to support after school school programs that include high-interest clubs. Teachers and counselors use common planning period to meet for RTI sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The school’s Pupil Personnel Committee (RTI team), the School Intervention Team and advisory teams, comprised of teachers, counselors and administrators, will review student progress reports and attendance data every two weeks. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Tracking of parental outreach, meeting with individual students, checking grades, conduct checks, credit accumulation monitoring. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher work together to engage in collaborative practice using the inquiry approach to improve classroom practice developing rigorous, standards -aligned instruction that informs their practice and assessments. The Instructional team will meet bi-weekly to discuss progress of professional development and impact on teaching practice and student progress. The team will develop a collaborative system(s) for measuring progress towards Inquiry goals and making adjustments to curricula which includes AP for All vertical alignment, during the course of the school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will meet three days a week to collaborate in inquiry and co-planning to design instruction that is sensitive to the differences in student abilities and increase performance on Regent exams. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher leaders in all subject areas teams and administration will meet once a week to prepare and analyze weekly professional learning sessions for inquiry Teachers, students September 2018-June 2019 ELA/ENL Teachers, Assistant Principal, consultants Teachers will receive feedback on curriculum alignment from administration, educational consultants, and colleagues during daily common planning time. All teachers September 2018-May 2019 Assistant Principal, consultants, teachers Teachers will engage in lesson studies and monthly inter-visitations using a protocol that measures student to student engagement. All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal, consultants, teachers Co-teachers will meet to prepare and review various types of formative assessments to inform daily instructional practice. Assessments will be modified to meet the needs of our SWD and ENL populations. All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal, consultants, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations in order to support their children at home through the use of our on-line grading system: Jupitergrades and parental outreach for academic, behavioral and/or attendance issues. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy funding will be used to provide instructional team time to meet and discuss planning for curricula development and inquiry monitoring that best supports the needs of our students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 0  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of each marking period teachers will meet with the principal to assess scholarship reports, periodic assessments and student work and discuss action plans for students who are at risk of failing classes and/or Regents examinations. Lesson plans will be reviewed on a weakly basis for questioning and assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship reports after each marking period, attendance outreach. Lesson plan checklist. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Principal and assistant principals will effectively use evidence-based systems such as Advance, classroom walk-through to examine and improve school-wide practices in supporting the Measure of Teacher Practice (MOTP), student credit accumulation/transcript review, scholarship reports and on-on-one conferences with stakeholders. Administration and faculty will speak a common language that is embedded in the school’s theory of action and instructional focus. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, principal and assistant principals will conduct no fewer than two classroom walk-throughs with every teacher participating in a minimum of one. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Build teacher capacity by honing in on teacher areas of strength and having them lead weekly professional learning sessions. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Fall, 2018 All teachers Administration will in continue to monitor the performance of teachers in the Danielson Framework for Teaching Domain 3: Instruction (3b, c, and d) to monitor the use of questioning, student to student engagement, and assessment. Administrators, teacher School leaders will closely monitor teachers closely in aligning with the schools theory of action to provide timely feedback to new teachers, specifically in planning and preparation Assistant Principals, teachers Assistant Principals and Teaching Matters consultants will conduct bi-weekly visits to teacher to provide non-punitive feedback on planning and preparation of lessons All teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Spring, 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Principal, assistant principals Administration, Teaching Matters coach Assistant principals, Consultants How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During parent-teacher meetings and SLT meetings the principal and parent coordinator will promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrators and teachers meet during the seventh period that has been incorporated into the teacher schedule (as per our SBO.) Teachers to meet each seventh period to look at student work and revise curriculum that best meets the needs of our students and supports our school community and culture. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 3  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administrators and consultants meet with teachers after a visit or walk-through to provide timely and actionable feedback, both verbal or written. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Checklist of Danielson's Framework indicators observed and integration of writing (rubric) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. All stakeholders (Parent Coordinator, community coordinator, Parent Association, and guidance counselors, administration) will collaborate to increase community related opportunities for all students through workshops, internships, etc., with a focus on learning about college and career and community service. The expectation that all students will graduate having taken at least one Advanced Placement course. Parent Coordinator attends more parental engagement workshops and networks with others on the school campus to provide more college and career readiness workshops for parents and students as shared by the Office of Parental Engagement. School leaders and staff consistently communicate expectations for all students and offer detailed feedback and guidance/advisement that prepare students for the next level. Our PA president attends and notifies administration, parent coordinator and guidance counselors of college and career readiness emails and/or pertinent workshops for parents and students as shared by the Office of Parental Engagement. More parent workshops informing them of college and career related opportunities as discussed during SLT meetings will be given by the Parent Coordinator. There need to be weekly communications to the homes: school messenger, Jupiter grades, e-mail. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase of 5% in the number of parents who participate in at least three workshops. Workshops will be focusing on college and career readiness, credit accumulation, SAT prep, and financial aid. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Eleventh and twelfth grade counselor outreach to parents specifically for SAT prep, financial aid and college and career support School Intervention Team and counselors in partnership with Central Special Education Coach and ACES-VR will create community service opportunities and improve quality of transitional needs (including C-DOS qualifications) of SWD. Students, parents Fall 2018-Spring 2019 Counselors, support staff, assistant principal Parents, students Sept.2018-June 2019 Counselors, ACESS-VR representative, support service personnel 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use all the services provided to our student population by working with the following entities: CUNY, SUNY, ACESS-VR, parent association and FACE. During the Parent Association/School leadership meetings parents will discuss set a schedule for parental workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 6  Counselors, Parent coordinators, Administration will monitor workshops by implementing exit tickets, short surveys to be provide feedback for the workshops provided. Teachers will submit phone-logs, bulletins, etc. which engage parents. The Parent Association and Parent coordinator will work on parental outreach. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Create an excel sheet with the quantity and comments of all indicators. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ELA below 75 on Regents Scoring below 80 on Algebra Regents. Under-credited and/or attempt failing Regents Under-credited and/or attempt failing Regents Under-credited and/or attempt failing Regents Top at-risk 9 th and 10th graders Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Argumentative writing Small group,one-to one After school, Saturday Academy Small group, one-to-one tutoring After school, Saturday Academy ,pull-out tutoring Small group instruction, After -schooltutoring, Saturday Academy Small group instruction, one-to-one tutoring Small groups After school tutoring, Saturday Academy Advisory Wednesdays Individualized goal assessments based on based on periodic assessments Individualized goal assessments based on based on periodic assessments Individualized goal assessments based on based on periodic assessments Individualized goals based social and emotional goals teacher recommendations 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently we have 13 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide them with counseling if necessary. We provide them with a backpack of daily necessities and academic gear. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruiting from Teaching Fellows program who train teachers using Danielson's Framework. Teachers have completed Advanced Placement seminars. Teaching Matters provides professional development and consultation to new teachers. We have partnered with Young Audiences to bring in various teaching artist work with our art and music teachers. In the summer we attend borough wide hiring fairs to recruit teachers directly from DOE programs. We are partnering with college teaching programs. We encourage all teachers to attend outside professional opportunities and offer in-house growth mind-set yoga sessions. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We are implementing the NYC Common Core aligned curriculum in math and ELA (Collections.) Our teachers are participating in advance placement workshops provided by AP for All Initiative. Our special education liaison attends monthly FSC workshops and turnkeys to colleagues. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 1  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The instructional team and Inquiry team (comprised of teachers) along with the administration work to create a schedule that teachers agree upon to best meet the needs of the school community. All professional development is geared towards providing uniformity and cohesiveness in instruction and preparing students to state claims and cite textual evidence across all content areas. Professional development is vetted by teacher teams. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal 175,654.00 0 0 X x x X x x 2 x X x X Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,068,135.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 3   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Unity Center for Urban Technologies, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Unity Center for Urban Technologies will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 5  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 6  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Unity Center for Urban Technologies, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 7  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 8  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 9  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, c-lubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 0  ● always try my best to learn. 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name Unity Center for Urban Technologies Borough Manhattan School Number 500 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Fausto de la Rosa Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Nancy Flores Teacher/Subject Area Shani Acevedo/English Teacher/Subject Area Elena Brito/Spanish Related-Service Provider Maria Prieto Superintendent Marisol Rosales Assistant Principal Wanda Rosado Coach type here School Counselor Miledy Infante Parent Janet Lugo Parent Coordinator Carla Briceno Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Broughton Other (Name and Title) Fran Corvasce/Consultant C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 276 2 Total number of ELLs 26 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.42%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 3 4 2 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The data for ELL students at Unity Center for Urban Technologies indicates that they still need assistance in the reading and writing modalities of the NYSELAT as determined by the Spring 2016 exam. Our ENL teacher gives a baseline assessment on the four modalities to all of the ELL students in each ENL class. The data of this exam is shared with all core teachers during our weekly Inquiry sessions and lesson studies. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Students are expected to attend after school tutoring and our Saturday Academy. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 3  We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs based on the number of students who tested commanding on the NYSELAT 2016 and have gone from scoring entering to expanding or higher. The expectation is that all of our expanding students will test out (be commanding) based on the use of instructional strategies geared to improving reading and writing. We will also track our ELL's in the progress they make in their content areas classes, specifically their successes on the Regent exams for their core classes. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL teacher will push in to the ELA and/or Social Studies classes where there is a large group of ELL students. Teachers meet during Inquiry sessions to discuss the progress and learning strategies that will assist our ENL population. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our ENL students partake in rigorous instruction in their classes. The ENL teacher works closely with the content area teachers; since our ENL population is small she is able to sit with each teacher and discuss the specific needs of her students and vice-versa. This is a priority since in based on collaborative discussions the ELL student was generally less participatory in the core classes. We have 9 ELL/SWD students and we are continuously monitoring their progress and now they have all expanding but struggle to be commanding. We await the results of the 2017 NYSELAT exam. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The ELL at our school have all come to us from a middle school and have been in the NYCDOE school system at least two years we have not currently had to use NYSITELL. The 2015 NYSESLAT data indicates we currrently serve 22 EnLs; eight which are long-term ELLs; of these long-term ELLs, 11 also have IEPs. Three of the students who tested out were also long-term ELL's. The ENL teacher focuses on teaching advance literacy skills. All ENL students take the ELA pre assessment exam with the allotted extended time and use glossaries when needed. For every Inquiry session where teachers look at student work, an ELL student is always part of the targeted group. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teacher teams meet on a weekly basis to discuss students on a bi-monthly basis to discuss the needs of the ENL and our ENL/SWD population. They are a target group of our Inquriy team also. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Due to our small number of ELL at our school he organizational model at our school is a self-contained, heterogeneous class for all ELLs. Beginners and expanding students also take a second period of ENL instruction. The ENL teacher integrates scaffolding, differentiation and several instructional strategies and techniques to allow students to succeed in the class and progress in their acquisition of academic English. Commanding students receive one ENL class and one ELA class. In order to accommodate all ELL students in the content area, the ENL teacher pushes in with a content area teacher and co-teaches with that teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. 4  Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Small group instruction consisting of 15 students or less is possible at Unity Center for Urban Technologies High School due to the small number of ELLs at the school. We will accommodate the needs of our ELL students based on the results of the 2016 NYSESLAT. All ELL students take one ELA class 5x per week along witht with the mandated units of studdy according to their proficiency level on the 2015 NYSESLAT. All transitioning and emerging students receive one unit of ENL per week as indicated on Part 154-2. Our commanding level students continue to receive services for the next two years. ENL teachers and general education teachers collaborate during the common planning period embedded into the teachers' schedule. Entering and emerging students receive two units of study per week; they are programmed for one ENL class in the regular days and a journalism course with the ENL teacher to attain the mandated minutes. Additional support services available for ELL’s at Unity Center for Urban Technologies are as described below: (a)Standardized Assessments: ELL’s are offered their entitled test accommodations for all standardized (i.e., Regents) testing. These accommodations include time extensions (i.e., time and a half), separate locations and/or small group administration, and a third reading of listening selections for the ELA Regents exam. The test results are used to assess their academic progress. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The program we offer at our school is freestanding ENL instruction. The core content is delivered to student with extra time on class exams. Core content is delivered to our ELL students buy providing scaffolded lessons using ENL strategies and one to one instruction by the teacher. ELLs are provided laptops and Ipads in all classes to assist in comprehension and/translation. Our ELLs must be pushed to understand the Common Core standards expectation and this begins in the ENL classroom. The ENL teacher is part of inquiry sessions and lesson studies in the content areas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At Unity Center for Urban Technologies, to ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language we administer the ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native languages by qualified staff members fluent in the students’ language or through the use of the DOE translation and interpretation unit. We ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language throughout the year having the option of testing in their native language in class assessment as well as on State assessments. The rationale behind this approach is that research indicates that proficiency in literacy and higher order thinking skills in the native language will support and transfer with efficiency in the second language acquisition process. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The 2016 NYSESLAT data indicates to our ENL teacher the needs of our students and our ELL population is small enough that she can create an action plan for all 22 students.a. Our instructional plan for SIFE students includes providing extra support at our school, particularly through push-in/pull-out. The five students are indicated as SIFE-are also newcomers. Each has a sibling who scored expanding on the exam and is partners up in core classes. The focus for SIFE students is on developing their literacy skills and vocabulary development so that they will be able to function on their grade level and beyond, if possible. Their written responses may be done, initially, in the student's native language. When possible, native language literacy will be assessed in order to ascertain probable levels of positive transference of skills. Continual assessments are used to evaluate student progress and tailor instruction. Additionally, SIFE students are provided with native language dictionaries 5  and English dictionaries and they encouraged to participate in the after-school program and Saturday Academy so they can receive additional help by content area teachers. b. Newcomers will be given two periods of free-standing ENL class and be supported throughout their day by content area teachers who use ENL methodologies in their lessons. The students will be provided with native language materials as available in an effort to maintain and promote their native language proficiency. Newcomer will also be given extra support for Regents preparation, particularly the ELA exam, through after-school and Saturday Academy preparation courses that will prepare them for the exam. c. Developing ENL students (for 4 to 6 years )receive additional support during the day through push-in/pull-out. The focus for these students is on reading comprehension skills and writing. These students receive instruction that is aligned to the CCLS in all content areas. The content area teacher also provides additional support for these students during the day by pairing them with a proficient student. They, too, are encouraged to participate in after-school and Saturday Academy. d. The focus on long-term ELLs is in the area of reading comprehension and writing. Content area teachers provide additional support. They are also given support during the day through push-in/pull-out. Our long-term ELLs are strong conversationalist. At least seven also have an IEP. They are encouraged to attend after-school and Saturday Academy where they will receive additional support in reading and writing. e. Former ELL’s in years 1 and 2 after testing proficiently are immediately exposed to CCLS aligned instruction with the continued use of scaffolding. They receive time and 1/2 when taking standardized examinations. They are introduced to college and career readiness benchmarks in order to integrate them and prepare them to be life-long learners. They are provided with extended time on Regent examinations, provided with dictionaries in their native language. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs are given support services from SETTS, CTT, and ENL teachers, who communicate with each other throughout the day about the progress of ELLs -SWDs. Students are provided with an IPAD to enable them to access academic content on their grade level and accelerate their English language development. Students use laptops and teachers use Smart boards to deliver their instruction to students. Teachers use "turn and talk”, pictures, photos, samples of authentic writing materials for students to use as models for their writing. Teachers review various pieces of data to support students in weekly and yearly academic needs. Teachers model instructional conversations that provide oral language practice for ELLs and help deepen students' conceptual frameworks for comprehension. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At Unity Center for Urban Technologies, teachers engage in curriculum mapping and inquiry to determine the needs of their ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. ELL-SWDs are provided instruction that is scaffolded with leading questions, leveled texts, visual and auditory support. The ENL teacher uses audiobooks, films and different levels of informational texts to support reading and content instruction. The ENL teacher models reading and writing strategies and note taking. During their team meetings, they discuss with the IEP and the ENL teacher appropriate strategies, grouping and scheduling that would best benefit these students. We also use formative assessments to assess our daily instruction and make decisions based on student's performance to determine the best instructional needs for our ELLs-SWDs. We review how well students perform in summative and state assessments to gather data that can allow students to be successful in the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs are focused on improving the literacy skills and Regents performance of all students. Services are offered in English during the day, imbedded into students' individual programs. Content area teachers (Math, Science, Social Studies and English) and the ENL teacher uses reading annotation strategies, leveled readings, visual aids, and guided notes to support content learning. After school tutoring is provided in Spanish with the ENL teacher and in English with the Learning Support Team and content area teachers. The ENL teacher has a reference library of Spanish textbook and workbooks in Spanish for Math, US and World History. Science teacher does word studies for students to front load and scaffold academic vocabulary. 6  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? While our students who test out (commanding) on the NYSESLAT are no longer considered ELLs, they are still in need of academic language development. We will continue to look at their written work our Inquiry team sessions. There will be more after school tutoring and attend Saturday Academy to better prepare they for all exams our ELLs are responsible for despite their ELL status. They receive time and 1/2 on all standardized examinations for the next two years after testing proficient. Students are offered transitional services in the form of tutoring sessions after school with the ENL teacher and content literacy classes. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not foresee discontinuing any of programs for ELLs since the trend seems to be that we will receive ELL students each year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all programs at the school. Students attend after school and Saturday Academy. We offer after school and supplemental services for ELLs on Monday - Thursday from 3pm - 5pm and Saturday Academy on Saturdays from 9AM - 12PM. We now offer SAT prep. During these programs students are given opportunities to receive tutorials in content areas by content area teachers. They are also given an opportunity to get help in specific areas that they made be having trouble. They participate in all campus-wide sports teams. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ENL students are provided with iPad and laptops. There is a laptop cart in every teacher's classroom so that they have access to technology so they can go online themselves to access the content. They are given dictionaries in their native language. They are given a thesaurus to help with their vocabulary. They are given books in Spanish and in English. They are provided the same materials in their content area courses, i.e. Ipads, laptop. ELLs have access to all of the handouts distributed in the content area. Teachers use technology to provide ELLs with content in their native language, as necessary. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students receive native language support throughout the day from the Spanish speaking ENL teacher by providing them with material in their native language, where necessary. Pairing them with students who speak their native language but who also have a great command of the English language. ENL students are provided with written material in their native language, (i.e. Google translator) as necessary. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The services and support that our ENL students receive correspond to the age and grade level because they are given an assessment at the beginning of the school term and depending on their results, teachers might have to scaffold instruction for them to help them reach their academic grade level or they may have to provide them with enrichment. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ENL students are provided with iPads and laptops. There is a laptop cart in every teacher's classroom so that they have access to technology so they can go online themselves to access the content. They are given dictionaries in their native language. They are given a thesaurus to help with their vocabulary. They are given books in Spanish and in English. They are provided the same materials in their content area courses, i.e. IPads, laptop. ELLs have access to all of the handouts distributed in the content area. Teachers use technology to provide ELLs with content in their native language, as necessary. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Currently, for newly enrolled students, parents are contacted and may come in to visit the school and meet with the Parent Coordinator and counselors. Orientations for newly enrolled ELLs include a tour of the campus as well as meeting with the 7  staff to become familiar with the resources available to them while they are in the school. The parent coordinator meets with all parents and answers their questions and concerns. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Advanced Spanish courses. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers are trained in the use of effective instructional strategies to provide support for our ELLs in mainstream classrooms. Teachers use instructional practices like scaffolding and modifying instruction for ELLs and QTEL techniques that help make content more accessible and comprehensible for ELLs. Professional Development is given to all teachers by a Teaching Matters consultant. Our ENL teacher will attend outside PD offered by DELLSS and then turnkey to all teachers. The ENL teacher is provided one-on-one professional development by a Teaching Matters consultant, who specializes in curriculum mapping and lesson planning that uses Understanding by Design, and incorporates the instructional shifts as designated in the CCLS. Our ENL teacher receives one on one professional development based on the formative professional goals she chose during her Initial Planning Conference with the principal. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our ENL teacher receives scores from students’ middle school or previous school. Our teachers review students work in teacher teams and lesson studies. All of our teachers receive a minimum of 7.5 hours of training in literacy strategies, scaffolding and how to communicate with parents and ELLs through professional development every Monday from our Teaching Matters consultant and one on one professional development from district coaches. Consultants provides administration with a log of feedback after every one-to-one session. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss ELL related needs as mentioned above, through monthly Parent Coordinator workshops and phone calls when a need is observed. This year we will further communicate with the parents of our long term ELLs who need to be more closely monitored. We develop a relationship of trust with our parents so that we can discuss student progress and/ or concerns. Our counselors, Parent Coordinator and attendance teacher work 8  collaboratively to ensure that any academics and or attendance issues are resolved. All of the personnel is fluent in Spanish and for those few ELL parents who speak another language we find a fluent speaker or use translation services from the DOE. We network with another school on campus who has students of many more languages and can be translators. . All conferences are translated and all documents are provided in students native language to ensure clear understanding of what is being discussed. There is regular communication by telephone between ELL parents and instructors, especially during the parental engagement period. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All ELL parents are invited to participate in our school's many functions, i.e. awards ceremonies, workshops. Parents are encouraged to support the school through participation in the PA and SLT meetings. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. This year we will do more in terms of engaging the parents of our long term ELL population that also has an IEP. We will target our long term ELLs group and provide more literacy support and attendance outreach. 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Fausto De La Rosa, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Unity Center for Urban Technologies School DBN: 02M500 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Fausto de la Rosa Title Principal Wanda Rosado Assistant Principal Carla Briceno Parent Coordinator Nancy Flores ENL/Bilingual Teacher Janet Lugo Parent Shani Acevedo/English Teacher/Subject Area Elena Brito/Spanish Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Miledy Infante School Counselor Marisol Rosales Maria Broughton Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Fran Corvasce Other Teaching Matters Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M500 School Name: Unity Center for Urban Technologies Superintendent: Marisol Rosales The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Nancy Wanda Flores Rosado ESL Teacher Assistant Principal Yes no yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Guidance counselor and administration analyzes all information on ATS. Our parent coordinator speaks with all parents of our ELLS and provides them with all forms, parental information guides and provides translators for parent conferences and IEP meetings. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2  Language SPANISH FRENCH BENGALI Written Preferred SPANISH Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan PARENT CALENDAR MONTHLY ACADEMIC LETTERS OCTOBER, DECEMBER, FEBRUARY, APRIL, JUNE to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. GOOGLE DOCS, PERSONNEL, OR TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION UNIT GOOGLE DOCS, PERSONNEL, OR TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION UNIT 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 3  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings PARENT TEACHER CONFERENCES OCTOBER MARCH ACADEMIC INTERVENTION MEETINGS MONTHLY How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? TEACHER VOLUNTEERS, TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION UNIT TEACHER VOLUNTEERS, TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION UNIT 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. OUR PARENT COORDINATOR IS THE POINT PERSON FOR EMERGENCY COMMUNICATION WITH PARENTS. IF SHE IS NOT AVAILABLE THE COUNSELORS ARE THE NEXT PERSON. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. STAFF MEMBERS WILL BE BRIEFED DURING THE SEPTEMBER CHANCELLOR'S DAY PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT. CHANCELLOR'S REGULATION A-663 WILL BE FOUND IN STAFF HANDBOOK. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) ALL PARENTS WILL BE MADE AWARE OF THEIR RIGHT TO RECEIVE INFORMATION IN THE STUDENT HANDBOOK AND ON JUPITER GRADES (DIGITAL GRADE BOOK) WE WILL ALSO HAVE POSTERS WITH THE INFORMATION IN OUR MAIN OFFICE. 4  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? MOST OF THE COMMUNICATIONS WILL GO THROUGH THE PARENT COORDINATOR, GUIDANCE COULSELORS, AND TEACHERS. THE PARENT COORDINATOR WILL ADDRESS THESE NEEDS IN FALL PARENT WORKSHOP. 5 
