 06M513 School Name: CASTLE BRIDGE SCHOOL Principal: JULIE ZUCKERMAN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Castle Bridge 310600010513 PreK-5 School Number (DBN): 06M513 560 West 169 th Street NY NY 10032 212-740-4701 212-740-4706 Phone Number: Fax: Julia Zuckerman jzuckerman@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 06 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Julia Zuckerman Angela DiGiulio RomelleMoore ElexisPujols Carmen Pedrazo N/A N/A N/A District Information Manuel Ramirez Superintendent: 4360 Broadway NY NY 10033 MRamire4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 917-521-3757 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: 917-521-3797 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 Seventh Ave, 8th floor NY, NY, 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646.470.0721 Phone Number: 917.339.1765 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Julia Zuckerman Angela DiGiulio RomelleMoore Crystal Williams Clare McArdle Sally Cleaver Sabrina Smith Sweeney AbbieWhite *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ana Lopez Vera Moore Ellen Schmidt Andrea Fonseca Samantha Diaz Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Castle Bridge is a new progressive, dual language, inclusive, integrated school that serves preK-5 th grade in the 2018-2019 school year. Our mission and design are: Mission: To provide each student with a high quality, arts infused, project based preK- 5 th grade experience that will develop the skills and passions for inquiry and engagement in support of their growth as scholars, workers and citizens.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Castle Bridge is a progressive, dual language, and fully inclusive school. Our partnerships include work with Per Dev an institute that we contract with in order to push our literacy practice through the use of a linguistic phonics approach. We also partner with the Emotionally Responsive Practice program out of Bank Street to improve our Social Emotional Learning in all classes. We work with two providers to increase our ability to support children in need of psychological support: Columbia Presbyterian has a mental health clinic in the building, and we also work with another provider called Harlem Family Institute which does 1:1 play therapy. In terms of special initiatives we prepared this past spring to implement an Orton Gillingham program across the school. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our special student populations are: ELL students, IEP students, children with an incarcerated parent Our inclusive, dual language classroom structures address the needs of the ELL and the IEP students. Our social worker and strong social-emotional pedagogy are meant to support the children with an incarcerated parent. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The school’s design will embody this mission in the following ways: 1. Through the educational program, children will meet or exceed state and national standards. The curriculum develops knowledge, concepts and skills through student initiated inquiry, emergent curriculum, differentiated instruction and formative assessment. Children are recognized as builders of knowledge and collaborators in problem solving; academic skills are learned and applied to these inquiries. 2. Integration and Inclusion stimulates the kind of learning necessary for members of a multi-cultural democracy. By providing a rich educational environment, families from various socio-economic and cultural circumstances are drawn to the school. In addition, all of the classes are mixed-grade which encourages students to stay with teachers for 2 years, lessens competition among students, increases the individuation of learning expectations, allows for social/emotional fluidity for children. 3. The school adheres to progressive educational philosophy in the tradition of Dewey, Weber, Meier and Carini. By accepting and pursuing balance between the values of the individual and the community, skills and habits, expression and perception, choice and adherence, measurable and immeasurable, safety and risk, the school places itself firmly in the progressive tradition. 4. Families are the organic partners in the educational process. From the informed choice that families make in registering their children at CASTLE BRIDGE, families are welcomed into the school community through: weekly communication, classroom volunteering, workshops, community events, and governance committees. 5. While the school makes concerted efforts to strengthen all of the components of the Great Schools Framework, the area that we have shown significant progress in this past year has been in rigorous instruction. This is evidenced by the gains in reading and math as measured by our digital portfolio system, particularly for the students who have struggled the most academically. We have been able to differentiate instruction and assign staff in ways that have supported these students in their academic achievement. Our specific focus going forward into the 2018-19 school year will be on improving our supportive environment and trust. 0  1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M513 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 229 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 66.0% % Attendance Rate 64.2% % Reduced Lunch 30.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 65.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 17.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.25 7% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 61.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 80% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 50 50 94.6% 1.7% 33.6% 10.0% 1.7% 4.4% 0 93% 0.9 64.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Castle Bridge believes in instruction that is customized, inclusive and aligned to the common core curriculum. In the Fall our teachers administer the Fountas and Pinnell Reading Benchmark Assessment System in both English and Spanish. Each teacher analyzes the results and with the support of the administration, they create individualized reading goals for each student. Based upon our data from last school year, it was determined that only 45% of the first grade class was able to achieve the benchmark reading levels in their native language by the end of the school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the 2018-2019 school year, 50% or better of the first grade class will achieve or exceed their individualized reading benchmark goals in their native language. This will allow them to progress appropriately and on target as they move forward into the remaining elementary school grades. This will be evidenced and measured by their performance on the benchmark assessments (Fountas and Pinnell) and assessed and reported to the principal five times during the year: by Sept 30th, November 30th, January 31st, April 30th, June 20th. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept/Nov/Jan/April/June Lead Teachers Teachers Assessment Coordinator  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will receive ongoing professional development through in house work as well as coaching from a Per Dev consultant. Parents will participate in curriculum nights and Various workshops where reading strategies are taught. These will occur twice during the year. Parents will also be informed throughout about their child’s Reading progress towards meeting the reading Goal through periodic check ins. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 4  Parents are kept informed through weekly letters home from the principal, and classroom teachers. PTA meetings are used for literacy workshops once a year. Kindergarten and First grade teachers plan bi monthly workshops during the Tuesday parent engagement time to specifically teach parents about the kind of reading and math strategies. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Use of Tuesday after school time for parent workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress is periodically checked using running records. Benchmarks are reviewed and re-evaluated throughout the school year. 50% of 1st grade students would be expected to have reached level F or G by mid year to be on target for achieving the reading goal. Families will continuously be informed of student progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell running records as well as stages of reading development. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? School climate is critical to children’s ability to engage productively in learning. Castle Bridge has been working to implement a school-wide approach to social emotional learning in preK-2nd grade with the Emotionally Responsive Practice program. This year we will push these practices into the 3rd through 5th grade. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Move the Emotionally Responsive Practices program into the 3rd through 5th grades. Send 1 teacher and 1 paraprofessional from the six upper grade classes to learn the approach, the professional development is provided in 5 full day workshops over the course of the school year. The principal and social worker will see evidence of the implementation of these approaches in 100% of the 6 upper grade classes. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 6 teachers and 6 paraprofessionals will attend the series of five workshops provided by Bank Street. Teachers, paras 5 times over the year Social worker, principal and staff who have already gone through the training Staff will provide workshops for parents Available to all parents Twice during the year Social worker, classroom staff, principal Classroom staff will create discussion forums for approaches to problem solving in each class Each class Particular children with their families will be engaged in ongoing in problem solving that recognizes children's strengths and builds their skills. All staff working with that particular student 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Once a month during grade level meetings All year Classroom staff in consultation with social worker Particular children with their families will be engaged in ongoing problem solving approaches How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents' interest in how the school's social emotional learning program provides the foundation for our disciplinary approaches are regularly raised in Friday conversations with the principal, during parenting discussions with the social worker, as well as in workshops provided by the teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We hire a full time social worker . In addition we have added a community associate position. Particular reading material will be made available for families. Specific staff will be sent to emotionally responsive practice professional development. 7  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We have ongoing reflection cycles at Castle Bridge. The family conferences in November and March are natural reflection points in our year. Each year the staff engages in a mid-year review. There will be a clear accounting at the end of January of what each staff member has engaged in in terms of Social Emotional Learning with indicators of what further steps will be put in place for the spring semester. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Part 5b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Anecdotal records of disruptive incidents for students. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Last school year, we worked on deepening teacher practice to support dual language literacy. Teachers were able to scaffold language acquisition skills, promote use of multiple modes of expression and guide student thinking through open ended questions. Teachers met biweekly or more often to discuss professional texts, share classroom literacy practices, discuss intervisitations and ask questions. Teachers were able to reflect on their own practice and decide on next steps through filming and inter-visitations. Teacher also express that this type of collaboration helped to grow their practice and is integral to the success of the learning program for the students. As we now have our fully realized complement of gradesr, teachers will continue to strengthen collaborative efforts to move the school forward as a learning community that is respectful and improving. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to continue our progress, teachers will continue to meet bi-weekly to participate in grade level groups that focus on deepening oral language development across content areas in both English and Spanish. This will be measured by Principal observations as well as monitoring of meeting agendas and minutes and reviewing survey results. 90% of teachers should be targeted as effective on Danielson by year’s end reflecting the positive student outcomes stemming from collaborative practice. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will visit each other’s classrooms with a lens of the work done in the grade groups. Teachers will choose 3 students to follow throughout the school year. All staff Monthly Teacher Leaders All year Teachers ELL, SLL, Bilingual Teachers will be observed using the Danielson Framework principal 4-6 times a year 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The principal, parent coordinator and community associate meet weekly with parents in groups and also fielding the individual approaches by parents, in addition to the weekly letter from the principal and monthly PTA meetings. Creating a welcoming space in which parents feel comfortable asking questions and learning more about the school is key. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 0  teacher meetings to reflect on observation reports Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January, the grade groups will reflect on the work teachers have done to that point to help students develop oral language skills in English and Spanish. Teacher will continuously evaluate the progress of the 3 chosen students to inform instruction and make adaptations and changes to the lessons. Principal and outside consultant will give feedback to the teachers throughout the school year on how oral language development is supported in the classroom. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid year observations utilizing Danielson to measure progress towards meeting the goals as well as teacher feedback. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We continue to consider the ways to adjust and deepen our practice and best support student progress. (We did have a high QR rating in 2014-15 in this area) . Analysis of teacher ratings through Danielson reveals work needs to be done in component 3C. By focusing on assessment we can help our students best understand what is being asked of them and how they can work toward achieving their goals step by step. We will make our goals more clear and transparent to students and parents through the use of rubrics and checklists in order to better focus on areas in need of improvement and understanding areas of strength for each student. This will give families a clearer idea of ways to help their own children as well as provide a guideline for the students. This is in keeping with our goal of providing additional social and emotional supports to our students and families which will drive student achievement in our school to continue to improve. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 90% of our teachers will be rated effective or higher on Danielson 3D: using Assessment in Instruction. This will be achieved through professional development sessions, principal observations, individual goal setting and inter-visitations. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Three Day Professional development session at the start and end of the school year. We will deconstruct Danielson, review rubrics for assessment and review final assessments for the year. All teachers Beginning and End of School year Principal, Coach, Lead Teachers, Consultant 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PTA officers and SLT parent representatives are in bi monthly conversation with the principal, teacher leaders, parent coordinator and the school social worker in order to message to the entire parent body the ways in which parents and staff collaborate in order to come to agreement around the ongoing direction of the school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for staff for summer retreat sessions. PTA and parent coordinator funds to pay for childcare and snacks so parents can attend these sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid year assessments will consider performance on Danielson Framework indicator 3C as well as mid year student progress towards meeting their goals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 3  Observations and student assessment data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Castle Bridge is committed to developing strong family ties. The most important feature of this relationship are the ways in which families and staff communicate around each child’s school experience. Toward this end families are able to see the children in a short recital performance once a week. Families get regular class newsletters home. The principal writes a weekly letter to families. Conferences include the child, not just the adults. Teachers write descriptive narrative progress reports on each child twice a year. An important feature that we lack is a longitudinal collection/portfolio system. We know that this will greatly enhance family understanding of the child’s school experience and progress over time. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The school staff have decided to use Google for gathering student work and information. Every child will have an online portfolio by June 2018. Every teacher will be held accountable for establishing these folders. The information gathered will be available to all of the student’s teachers, and will eventually be available to the student and her/his family. Each grade band will add at least the following components to the digital portfolio this year: 2 math pieces, 3 writing pieces and 2 descriptions of reading to better reflect student work in all areas. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Staff members will continue to work with our PROSE group and the NYC Learning Record group to determine which information/materials will be catalogued All students September -June 4 teachers and principal who work with those groups All classroom staff will set up digital files for each student that will hold the student’s January narrative report All students February 14 All classroom staff Staff will agree upon and begin collecting the information and materials that will be kept in each student file All students February-June 2018 All classroom staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parents on the SLT and PTA will assist staff in messaging to the whole parent body the intent to and value of developing digital student portfolios that will display longitudinal student growth across the years that the child is at Castle Bridge. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Purchase computers/ipads for data collection and storage. . Use Monday pd sessions and Tuesday after school time for data collection and review. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Principal, secretary, and community associate will monitor teacher progress. Each child's portfolio will contain the first term's narrative report as well as a writing and math sample by February 15th. 6  At the end of June, each child's portfolio will contain both narrative reports, 2 writing samples, 2 math samples and whatever additional work samples the grade team chooses. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Principal and staff coach will view student files in February, April and June. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Reading below grade level Low performance on MOSL and school assessments Poor performance on school assessments Poor performance on school assessments Social/Emotional conflicts within the classroom, disruptive incidents with the classroom or school community Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Phonic work, fluency, comprehension strategies Number identification, grouping, regrouping Vocabulary development, review content Vocabulary development, review content Play therapy, conversations, work with the family Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group instruction Small group instruction Small group instruction Small group instruction During school day and afterschool tutoring During the school day During the school day During the school day One on one, small group discussion During the school day 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We do not currently enrolled who are in temporary housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) X Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We have highly qualified teachers. Since our program is dual language, and inclusive, we aim to have every teacher certified as bilingual and special ed. Teachers who do not have both of these certifications are working toward one or the other. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We have ongoing cycles of professional development that focus on: math, literacy, dual language, assessment, arts, social emotional learning, and perceptual development. We rotate through these topics with teachers and paras alike. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. We are using the Title 1 resources in four categories. 31K towards the salary of the social worker in order for her to work directly with the Title 1 students and their families. 36K to bring in a math specialist to work specifically with the Title 1 students who are below grade level in math two days a week. 20K to bring in a reading consultant who will work with Title 1 students below grade level in reading acquisition and their teachers. 1  The remaining 14K is in supplies. Some of that will be used to buy ipads for Title 1 use. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). The TA program is fully integrated with the "regular" program because the social worker, math and reading specialist have all worked with the whole school population and been deeply involved with the development of our full inclusion curricular model. Because of that, they know how to target and assist in ways that merely extend and intensify the variety of differentiation strategies that we already use, and were hoping to enhance. The social worker in particular is able to work with families to help integrate them fully into the school in ways to reduce the marginalization they often feel. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 2  Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 3   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Castle Bridge School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Castle Bridge will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 5  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 6  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Castle Bridge School ,in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 7  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 8  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 9  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 0  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our program will target our 24 ELLs in Grades 2-5 who have not yet met the commanding level on NYSESLAT,as well as EPs in the DL program who need additional support in Spanish academic language skills based on in-class assessments. These students will placed into three heterogeneous groups (8 per group) based upon both grade and ELL proficiency level in order to continue our mission of building community across the grades and teach and learn from each other. The program will meet T/W/Th beginning November 7th and ending on May 31st. The program will be conducted in Spanish on T/Th and in English on Wednesdays. It will run from 3:30-4:30PM for 77 sessions Three bilingual certified teachers will administer the program. Children will rotate through three learning stations (20 min each): Phonics, Guided Reading and Language through Music. Teachers will utilize Estrellita and Spaulding for phonics, leveled guided reading sets for guided reading in Spanish and Music and Jazz Chance and folk songs for language and music. Rigby leveled readers will also used and as all other purchased materials will be solely for the Title III After-School Supplemental program for its duration. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The professional development program has been created to deepen attention to the structures and systems needed to support Spanish and English literacy and oral language development particularly in our dual language school setting. Our Title III Program teachers will receive support covering specific strategies for small group instructions to be focused on developing academic language skills in both Spanish and English. Turnkey workshops will then be offered to the general staff to build capacity and develop best practices school-wide. The teachers are continuing to learn and implement the Linguistic Phonics approaches through Per Dev Pomerantz.Literacy Consultants. Per Dev Pomerantz is currently working with our Title III teachers (along with our general staff for 15 sessions providing professional development services. 3  Part C: Professional Development 2018-2019 Sessions held on the following dates and times: October 5th 8:45-12PM, 2018 October 15th 8:45-3PM, November 5th, 8:45-3PM, November 26th 8:45-3PM, December 10, 8:45-3PM January 7th, 2019 8:45-3PM, January 9 3-4PM, January 11th 8:45-12PM, February 4th 8:45-3PMPM March 1, 8:45-12PM, March 11th 8:45-3PM April 1, 8:45-3PM, April 15th 8:45-3PM May 6th, 8:45-3PM, May 20th, 8:45-3PM June 3rd, 8:45-3PM, June 17th 8:45-3PM ELL specific topics covered include but not limited to: Linguistic Phonics, Multi-Sensory Phonics, Guided Reading, Second Language Acquisition, Language and Music The teachers are also participating in the Bank Street Language (October 27th, 2018) series to deepen their knowledge in second language acquisition across content areas. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our parent engagement program was created in order to increase parent understanding of how they can support their children's academic growth in literacy and oral language. Based on information gathered by teachers during parent interviews and family conferences it was determined that a series of literacy workshops. From ___ on _____ _______ (date) for 10 weeks, two of our Title III teachers will be working with parents of ENLs and EPs in our Dual Language program to develop strategies they can use to impact higher achievement in their child's learning, either in Spanish or English, as well as enhance the parents' knowledge of both languages and content being studied in class. When needed our teachers will translate and interpret for our parents. Topics will include: Reading With and To Your Child, Playing Phonics and Word Games with your child, Using Songs at Home and Family Story Telling Parents are notified in the school newsletter as well as through email and phone communication in their preferred language of communication 4 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 1) 45 sessions for 3 teachers from February 2017 to June 2017 for after school enrichment for ELL students 2) 10 hours each for2 teachers to work with parents on math and literacy techniques for ELL students for an hour after school, February 2017 to June 2017 Per Dev 8 hours - $1200 for PD Estrellita Games and Activities Estrellita Accelerated Program Consumables for Program Teacher Guide Spalding Word Builder Cards Spalding Rigby Guided Reading Sets: Rigby Sales Magenta Package Rigby Sales Edicion Anaranjade Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem $7,456.00 (direct instruction) $1,105.00 (Parent engagement) Purchased services  High quality staff $1,200.00 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $2605.00 $12,366 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 06 School Name Castle Bridge School Borough Manhattan School Number 513 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Julia Zuckerman Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Elizabeth Ciotti Teacher/Subject Area Gisela Rivera, Bilingual Teacher/Subject Area Andrea Fonseca, Bilingual Spec Related-Service Provider Lynn Chamberlin, Speech Teache Superintendent Assistant Principal type here Coach Donnie Rotkin School Counselor Ines Gonzales Parent Patricia Padilla Parent Coordinator Crystal Williams Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Norah Olivo, Paraprofessional C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 7 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 7 4 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 6 0 D. Student Demographics 6  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 225 Total number of ELLs 61 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 27.11% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish/English Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2 3 4 K 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 8 0 0 8 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Castle Bridge/Escuela Puente del Castillo uses EL SOL and Estrellita to assess the early literacy skills for ELLS. EL SOL is an assessment protocol designed ot help Spanish Bilingual teachers in the early childhood grades track each students progress of learning the skills necessary to read and write. Additionally this tool assists to teachers to develop an appropriate instructional program for each student. EL SOL is designed ot track each students progress in the following 4 strands: Alphabet/Sight words-measures each students ability to recognize alphabet letters by name and sound, and to recognize common words by sight. Reading- measures each students ability to read and understand text. Writing Mechanics- measures each student's ability to express meaning through writing, using correct grammar and 7  punctuation. Phonemic Awareness-measures each student's ability to express meaning through writing, using correct grammar and punctuation. Phonemic Awareness-measures each student's sensitivity to the sounds of language and his/her awareness of phonemes. E SOL information allows the teacher to place each student on a literacy development continuum of six levels, ranging from Getting Ready to Read/Write to the Independent Reader/Writer. The student is placed on the continuum in each of the four strands. The data from this assessment outlines the majority of emergent readers that need a lot of alphabet/sight word support vocabulary support as well as support with phonemic awareness Our teachers will use this data to structure the literacy and classroom content to meet the needs of each student in order to ensure progress in acquiring the skills necessary to become an independent reader and writer. Lastly, teachers will share results from the assessments during parent meetings and parent teacher conferences. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the programs implemented at Castle Bridge for ELL's is evaluated through analysis of the NYSELAT. We look at how many students are proficient. We analyze how children are doing in all subject areas. We look at the feedback from the parents. We examine informal observations, understand learning curve of teachers, and analyze our success while addressing how we can better service their needs. We analyze our Annual Measure of Academic performance and pay attention to areas where we are showing areas of growth. Additionally, we assess teacher's comfort level with servicing the English As a New Language students within their classrooms. We consider information collected at teacher conferences, parent feedback and re-evaluate where improvements have been made. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school works with ELLs at a tier 1 level through providing scaffolded and differentiated instruction that prevents students from falling behind their peers. For those ELLs who need more support, as assessed through the periodic assessments as well as the NYSESLAT and NYS exams, we provide tier 2 support in the form of small group intervention both in and out of the classroom. Some of our ELLs who also have IEPs, also receive Wilson intervention with our IEP and special education specialists. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns across proficiency level reveals that the majority of students who were administered the NYSITELL are at beginner level. Therefore, additional support will be provided for teachers in targeting early reading and writing skills, as well as providing contextual supports for sight words and phonemic awareness. Considering that the data for reading and writing was determined to be low, it will be supported through guided writing and reading. For example, strategies will be implemented for teachers on being explicit during the reading and writing process and strategies. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 8  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Paste response to questions here: b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. heterogeneous The Dual Language Program consists of the roller coaster model. In the Dual Language Program, instruction is delivered 50% of the time in English and 50% in Spanish in both the roller coaster. In this model, approximately half of the students are English proficient and the other half is Spanish dominant. The classrooms are heterogeneous in proficiency levels in both English and Spanish. All teachers work collaboratively with the classroom teacher to support ESL students. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In the Dual Language Program, mandated instructional minutes are met through providing explicit English as a Second Language instructional support through the content areas of Social Studies and Science. Dual language teachers are required to incorporate English instruction through the content areas on a daily basis in order to meet the language needs of students (360 minutes for Beginner and Intermediate students and 180 students for Advanced students). ELA instruction is also incorporated into the daily schedule through reading, writing, and mathematics time blocks. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the Dual Language Program roller coaster model, students receive all content areas in both English and Spanish. Some of the instructional approaches and methodologies used to make content comprehensible and to enrich language development are visual support, cooperative learning groups, vocabulary building support, thematic approaches, The Language Experience Approach, project based learning, and differientiated instruction. These approaches and methodologies are incorpoarted on a daily basis to meet the needs of English Language learners based on their language and academic needs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Informal and formal assessments are done throughout the year to monitor home language.: 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 4a. SIFE students are placed in the Dual Language Program as with all of our students. The Dual Language teachers provide small group instruction to support the students in both their native language and second language. Before an instructional 9  plan is incorporated teachers assess students in order to provide the necessary support needed. The instructional plan for SIFE students often incorporates enriching a students' native language through literacy and oral language while also providing exposure to all content areas. Teachers provide opportunities for students to work in partnerships and expose students to life experiences. 4b. Newcomer students are in the Dual Language. Newcomer students receive instruction as all other students. Cognates, word associations and other language skills are taught to students. The Dual Language Program provides support to Spanish speakers. Literature in the students' native language are placed in the classrooms to help support students native language. Often teachers place students in partnerships and help foster peer socialization and support. 4c. English Language Learners with 4-6 years of ESL services in the Dual Language program are supported by the classroom teacher throughout the day. The classroom teacher integrates modeling, critical thinking skills, graphic organizers, and thematic approaches to reinforce the skills and strategies students need to master. Visual and audio equipment and supplemental materials such as Reader's Theater, bilingual dictionaries/glossaries, guided reading books are used to support lessons and student work. 4d. N/A 4e. English Language Learners with special needs in the Dual Language are supported through the same instruction as other students. Students are assessed regularly and placed into partnerships, strategy groups, and based on their IEP mandates, language needs, and academic. A variety of manipulatives, visual/audio materials, and hands-on support is provided to the students. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All materials are provided in English and Spanish and grouped by theme with mixed levels of reading level and complexity to allow for access for all and a shared experience with the content materials. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Given our differentaied instruction practice, all of our classes are staffed with a collaborative team teaching team with an additional para professional to provide extra support for students with IEPs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We provide intervention for ELLs in ELA, Math and other content areas throughout the day as needed. Classroom teachers work with students in small differentiated groups in both languages. Teacher partnerships are formed to address the individual needs of targeted students. Both academic and language needs are addressed and supported through a variety of lessons and activities. Teachers and additional related service providers provide English and Spanish intervention for students who need additional support in ELA, Mathematics, and all the content areas. Some of the strategies students work on are decoding , comprehension, critical thinking, and expressive language. The intervention provided to students helps develop language acquisition. Students work on grammar/writing, organization, and word attack skills. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Because we follow the differentiated instruction model, programs are designed around our ELLs needs and strengths. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students receive access to same school programs. 0  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The following materials are used to support English Language Learners: active and interactive instruction, sequence flash cards, photo library, Benchmark guided reading books, and Rigby: On our way to English. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered in Dual Language program by providing a program which offers a 50/50 language model. Students receive instruction in both English and Spanish in all content areas. In the roller coaster and Dual Language model, students have the opportunity to receive native language support in either English or Spanish throughout the day. A student's native language is embraced and nurtured through ongoing classroom activities, providing classrooms with student native language literature, and celebrating schoolwide diversity. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required service support and resources are both grade and age appropriate for our ELLs. All students are assessed on a daily basis and are provided with the necessary materials, instruction, and environment to receive a high quality education. Both formal and informal assessments take place throughout the year in order for classroom teachers to support all English Language Learners. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The following materials are used to support English Language Learners: active and interactive instruction, sequence flash cards, photo library, Benchmark guided reading books, and Rigby: On our way to English. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students who are newly enrolled are often invited to orientations and open houses. Students and parents are welcomed to come and observe classrooms and other school activities. These events assist students in getting aquainted with the school community. Students and parents are encouraged to ask questions and other assisting teachers about school programs, activities, and expectations. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? n/a 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We utilized a roller coaster dual language model. 50% of the day is in English and 50% of the day is in Spanish. Core contect is taught in both languages. Language is separated by time of day. Mornings and afternoons alternative in each language. 1  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. We have ELLs in every classroom. All our teachers participate in professional development that is relevant to ELLs. Teachers participate in Teacher's College Reading and Writing workshops with a lens on ELLs and coaches that come to Castle Bridge are expected to be knowledgeble of ELLs and provide PD accordingly. Our math coach is bilingual and she provides PD support with ELLs in mind. Instruction is differentiated thoughout the school. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. n/a We are an elementry school Prek-4 All teachers are educated on working with ELLs throughout the school. We have veteran teachers that have taken the required 12 hours of ESL training and newer teachers receive Professional Development on ESL and native language support from our dual language coordinator Australia Fernandez. Donnie Rotkin, our math coach, provides all professional development with ESL and ELL lens. We ensure that all teachers are knowledgeble of the fact that a great majoirty of our students are either ELL or former ELL. Our curriculum throughout the school includes strategies that meets the needs of ELLs in all subject areas. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Information shared at orientation meetings, parent workshops throughout the year, parent-teacher conferences and customized meetings with specified staff members i.e. social worker, parent coordinator, principa. Our parental involvement is based on parent input and student needs. It helps create consistancy of information and it faciliates communication. Parents are better able to support their children at home if they understand the curriculum and feel part of the community. Part of the work we do is to welcome families and to help them see how their input and support in the school and at home facilitates their children's academic progress.l 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent workshops in spanish, PTA meetings with translation, community sing events with translation 2  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Julie Zuckerman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Julie Zuckerman Title Principal Assistant Principal Crystal Williams Parent Coordinator Elizabeth Ciotti ENL/Bilingual Teacher Patricia Padilla Parent Donnie Rotkin Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Ines Gonzalez School Counselor Manuel Ramirez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 06M513 School Name: Castle Bridge School Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our parent community’s language preferences are collected from the Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL) from ATS, Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), Student Emergency Contact Forms, and inquiring directly with parents. If Spanish or English is not one of the languages indicated, we use the DoE’s Translation & Interpretation Unit’s Language Identification Guide to assess language preference. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 6 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spanish is currently the preferred language for approximately 32% of our parent community. We also have one family in each of the following preferred language groups: Chinese, French, and Serbo-Croatian. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School Handbook, September; After-School Program Handbook, September; Principal’s Weekly Word, weekly; PTA Newsletter, monthly; Class Newsletters, weekly, Parent Engagement Activity Notices, weekly/monthly. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Formal Meetings include but not limited to Family-Teacher Conferences (twice per year AND as requested), IEP meetings (as mandated), PTA meetings (monthly), and Curriculum/Orientation Nights provide interpretation service(s)? 7  (September/October). Informal Meetings include Community Sing (weekly-Mondays), Recital (weekly-Fridays), Family Fun Days (monthly), Family Meet & Greets (September/June). 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Multilingual Welcome Poster and the Language ID Guide is conspicuously posted in the main office of the school. The culture, design, and policy of our dual language, progressive school inherently provides and educates parents of their rights to language access in written and oral formats. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Given our parent community’s active engagement in school matters, feedback on the quality of translation and interpretation services is readily provided to staff, teachers, and administrators alike. 8 
