2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 02M529 School Name: JACQUELINE KENNEDY ONASSIS HIGH SCHOOL Principal: EDWARD DEMEO 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis High School 31020011529 9-12 120 West 46 th Street 212-391-0041 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 02M529 212-391-1293 Fax: Edward DeMeo Edemeo@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Edward DeMeo Hector Colon Annette Austin Hamilton Leticia Milan Melody Singleton Lauren Gutierrez Rebecca Jowalapersaud CBO Representative: NA District Information Geographical District: 02 Superintendent’s Office Address: Marisol Bradbury Superintendent: 333 7 th Avenue New York, NY 10001 MRosales7@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-7563 Phone Number: 212-356-7514 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Avenue ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-705-5856 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Edward DeMeo Hector Colon Annette Austin Hamilton NA Melody Singleton FahidNayem Stanley Nauzile NA MorlonMitchell Yolanda Paucar Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mia Spitz Leticia Milan MichealaOkwabi Sophelia Jenkins Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview In order to best understand the Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis High School (JKO) community, one needs to first review the school vision and mission statements. The school vision statement conveys our view of how JKO graduates will engage the world upon graduation. Specifically, the vision statement shares that we envision our students graduating well prepared for both the business and educational communities. JKO students will graduate college and career ready emboldened with the understanding that their experiences will enhance their ability to become vibrant, active members of the world community. Our students will transition to higher educational opportunities which include four-year degrees, Masters Degrees and even Doctoral Degrees. Our students will become leaders in whatever profession chosen. Based on this overarching vision, the school mission statement is designed to develop young men and women with active and creative minds, with a sense of understanding and compassion for others, and the courage to act on their beliefs. We stress total development of each child, morally, intellectually, socially, emotionally and physically. We also exist to advance the field of business studies through world-class education, knowledge creation and brokering new and powerful connections. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Strengths JKO Instructional Action Plan Community Partnerships Student Achievement The plan has focused school administrative and pedagogical efforts to ensure that we address the needs of our students from a cogent and aligned set of beliefs. The Theory Of Action is, If teachers provide a greater number of opportunities for students to exhibit complex thinking in the class setting, then students will demonstrate increased levels of knowledge and skill across content areas in reading, writing and speaking. Our community partnerships include a wide range of organizations such as Virtual Enterprises International (VEI), Roundabout Theatre, NYC Mentoring Program, Learning Leaders, College Now, Intrepid LIFTT Program Junior Achievement (JA), Lead Higher Initiative, AP for All and Viacom. As a result of these partnerships, students have been able to work with industry professionals on a variety of levels, such as students attending a unique Viacom Program whereby they worked with the producers of a children’s television show to create their own episode. We have spent the year to develop the infrastructure to expand the AP program with AP for All and College Access Program. Three students were honored for their artistic achievements with two being celebrated at the Met. The Roundabout Theatre Company will provide teacher residencies and student workshops; the workshops will be held at the theater as part of an arts immersion program. The Theatre company PD division has worked with our Humanities department to hone engagement activities. The Virtual Enterprise (VE) and Academy of Hospitality and Tourism (AOHT) program teams will complete the submission for CTE certification for 2017-2018. This will result in a vast increase in students recognized as College and Career Ready. Career & Technical Education (CTE) 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  Approximately 100 students are entering JKO in 2018-2019 between freshman entry and sophomore transfers in; we will total approximately 525 students in the school based on present projections. In total, 53 (8.9%) will comprise our ELL program and approximately 117 (19.7%) will total our Special Education program. A majority of our SE program is aligned to the ICT program structure. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The key foci for our school is to build upon this year’s work is a continuation of the work begun last year and is designed to address our Problem Of Practice (POP) which has been defined as our need to provide students with increased opportunities to practice thinking or engage in problem solving through different types of modalities. Specifically, we will continue to address the misalignment between the tasks assigned to students and the performance expected. A deeper analysis has indicated that pacing for student understanding, questioning designed to foster student discussions and assessments were not directly. An analysis of the final MOTP ratings revealed that 3% of the teachers were rated as Highly Effective; 61% were rated as Effective; 24% were identified as Developing with 12% rated as Ineffective. The aggregate scores for domain 3 based on end-year analysis was notes as: Domain 3b (2.07/4.0), Domain 3c (2.35/4.0), and Domain 3d (2.30/4.0) As a result of these data streams, we will realign the PD plan with the POP and how our teachers are planning for our focus group with particular concentration on sub groups. We will continue with the grade level structure enacted in 2017-2018 and allocate PD time to re-frame the curriculum maps, develop learning targets and revise the writing program for the school community. 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. We have changed the operating structure to move to a grade level team format. Indicator: The school has established a team structure among teachers with specific duties and time for instructional planning. Explanation: The evidence review indicates that incorporating team structures into the school culture assists in driving improvement at the school and informs district policies and practices. Team structures charged with specific functions and purpose can address three unique areas of need in schools; instruction and instructional methods, whole school improvement planning and family community connections. Teams, when effectively constructed and managed, shore up continuous improvement planning frameworks. Questions: How will the school establish team structures with specific purpose and duties? How will the school ensure that time necessary for meetings is supplied and protected for teams? How will the school prepare teachers for their service on teams? What incentives will the school offer to attract teachers to serve on teams? How will the school articulate in its governance policies and procedures the purpose and expectations of teams? How will the school document the work of teams? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  Evidence Review: Establishing Team Structures to Drive Improvement, when effectively purposed, organized, and supervised, provide an infrastructure for continuous improvement. Marzano (2003) points out the leadership should not reside with one individual; a team approach to planning and decision making allows for distributive leadership. While principals in effective schools promote staff collaboration, teachers working with less effective instructional leaders function more as individuals than as members of a school team – “in the less successful schools, teachers were often left completely alone to plan what to teach, with little guidance from their senior colleagues and little coordination with other teachers: (Rutter et al., 1979, p. 136). Collaborative activities that do occur in these less successful schools are more socially based and less professionally oriented than the exchanges that occur in schools with more effective instructional leaders. Schmoker (1996) recommends that teams of teachers implement, assess, and adjust instruction in short-term cycles of improvement – not annually, but continuously. Common team tasks include intensive efforts to align content taught across grades, and development of interim and diagnostic mini-assessments to monitor student progress on a continuing basis. Practices such as the development of agendas and minutes and the use of organized procedures for meetings help the teams stay focused and maintain a history of team work. Planning and decision making within the district and school require teams, time, and access to timely information. That is, decision-making groups must be organized and given time to plan and monitor the parts of the system for which they are responsible. Hassell et al. (2006) provide useful tools to begin the change process and get planning teams started. A basic structure for team planning, work, and decision making in a school includes a Leadership Team, Instructional Teams, and a team focused on the family-school connection (such as a School Community Council). The Leadership Team is typically comprised of the principal and team leaders from the Instructional Teams (grade level or subject area teams). The Leadership Team may also function as the School Improvement Team, with parent members attending meetings scheduled for purposes of reviewing and amending the school improvement plan. Instructional Teams are manageable groupings of teachers by grade level or subject area who meet to develop instructional strategies aligned to the standards-based curriculum and to monitor the progress of the students in the grade levels or subject area for which the team is responsible. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M529 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 567 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 20 19 5 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 17 13 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 77.8% % Reduced Lunch 10.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 65.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.25 2% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 75% 66% 58.4% 0.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Black, Black, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES No N/A 123 117 16 78.1% 1.6% 18.3% 22.9% 6.2% 1.9% 6 31% 7.1 N/A N/A 79% 68% 77.6% 17% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The most recent Quality Review (QR) denoted that Domains 1.1 (Ensuring engaging, rigorous and coherent curricula in all subjects accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards) and 1.2 (Developing teacher pedagogy from a cohere set of beliefs about how students learning best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching.) and Domain 2.2 (Align assessments to curricula, use on going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels) were rated as Developing. Horizontal and vertical alignment illustrating consistent rigor aligned to assessments are needed. As a result of this rating, I have rated the school as Developing in 3.2. Additionally, we believe that a central tool to be used to address the data trend outlined above is to focus on the level and consistency of school pedagogy and re-aligning monitoring and evaluative systems. A review of our data indicates that we have seen improvement with the previously identified subgroup (African American and Latino males), but the improvement, but a gap analysis illustrates that this focus group has room for continuous improvement. We will also focus on the improvement of student outcomes for those in the ENL program; data analysis indicates that our students in this program are not progressing well as evinced by the recent Regents and credit attainment results. We have identified these subgroups as part of the Strategic Instructional Action Plan and the 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  data will continue to be shared in the grade level teams and cited in the observations, specifically the data segment of the guide. The central component of the Area Of Focus (AOF) was best defined by the fact that the learning intentions and the tasks were not consistently aligned. As a result of this misalignment, the depth or rigor of the instructional experience was misaligned. In response to the issue, we will implement the following: Effort School provides teachers with a concentrated common planning time and PD support School administration will use the Atlas Rubicon Curriculum Mapping system to re-align curriculum and inform the PD. Timeline Year-Long (PD Plan aligned to Instructional Action Plan) Progress Steps Weekly PD sessions alternating between department and whole school Assigned role Administrative Team Year long The administration will rewrite the maps in the summer of 2017. Department Chairpersons and Principal. Department Chairpersons and Principal Principal Administrators Administrators The revised document will be implemented in September 2017; it will be revisited and edited quarterly The goals will be reviewed during pre and post observation meetings as well as larger PD sessions. Teachers will meet with the Principal and/or administrator for midyear analsysi of their work and to revisit Personal Pedagogical Goals. The tracker data will be collated and shared by the Data Specialist. The Department Chairpersons will coordinate with the Principal to assess and implement support measures. ICT Guide to be reviewed for editing June 2018 to September 2019 Initial Planning conferences will be held in September to establish teacher Personal Pedagogical Goals and to align teacher practices to ADVANCE system September 2018 Mid-Year Meetings February 2019 Year long Share the MOTP Tracker data with each teacher as part of the observation process.Analyze MOTP Dashboard data to norm observation practices and to buttress or provide evidence of how PD should adjust, or realign teacher focus. Teachers have been provided with weekly department, whole school and inquiry time as per the change in schedule from a multi-session to a single session school Administrator responsibilities will be realigned for the third consecutive year to provide direct supervisory support per subject with two Year Long Weekly meeting time Administrators August 2018 Weekly Cabinet meetings and individual observation calibration Administrators 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17  administrators serving as support members of each pedagogical team. Exit Interviews June 2019 walk throughs and observations Teachers will meet with the Principal for an end year analysis of their work and to set goals for the new term. Principal Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, lesson plans, units of study and student projects will illustrate engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards, as measured by a 5% increase in student credit attainment. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Observations, walk throughs, informal and formal reports will be used to provide teacher support. The ADVANCE data will be used to focus on which domains are in greatest need of improvement. Teachers Teachers will provide PD to peers as part of the PD Plan. Specifically, teachers will focus on how to most aptly engage students in the class setting. Teachers & Administrators Inter Visitations will be used to provide our teachers across and within grade levels learning opportunities to assess practices. Teachers Principal and Administrators Principal, Administrators and Teachers Administrators September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 Teacher residencies will be used for new teachers to the building and those who have been poorly rated in the previous year based on the MOTP and MOSL outcomes. Teachers Septembe2018 to June 2019 Teachers and Administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and Guardians will be engaged through a variety of mechanisms, namely: *Three Parent-Teacher meetings--Teachers and Administrators *PupilPath as part of the on line grading system-AP PPS *JKO website-APO *SLT Monthly Meeting-Principal *Surveys-APO *Curriculum Night Event-COSA Team (Teachers) *AP Pot Luck Event-AP Teachers *Instructional Fairs (Core Subjects)-Administrators--APPPS, APO and Principal 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19  *CTE Event-Business Teachers and Principal *School Trips-Grade Level Managers *Parent-Teacher Workshops-Parent Coordinator *NHS Events-NHS Coordinator *Career Day Event-Ms. DeNisi, Business Teacher *Off Broadway Events-Roundabout Theatre Partnership *Counselor Parent Workshops such as Financial Aid Event and ENL Support-Counselors Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources needed to implement this year’s action plan are: ● Scheduling Title 1 funds to purchase SKEDULA system to monitor student progress, Roundabout Theatre and Magic Box Productions. ● Allocating FSF, Title and Title III funds to support teacher training. ● Use of NYC DOE and/or NY State Resources such as Common Core Library, EngageNY Curriculum in ELA, Department of English Language Learners and Student Support instructional resources recommended by the DOE Handbook for Professional Learning and professional texts, OTPS for student consumables and workshop materials. ● Use FSF fund Allocation to provide tutoring services. ● Providing team meeting time between the Social Studies and English departments to align skill and content from a pedagogical perspective. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The process monitoring used as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning at JKO is identified as our use of the following benchmarks (Administrators and designated teacher teams will support the effort):  MOSL Assessments-November-December  Term 1 Midterm Exams-November ; Term 2 Midterms-March  Mock Regents exams for each subject ending in a Regents exam  Term 1 Final Exams- January; Term 2 Finals-June  Random collection of lesson plans for alignment analysis 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20 Student Class Credit Analysis Data Custom Report-October, December and January, SKEDULA Analysis-weekly by individual teachers, students and parents-guardiany January Regents Exams  Random collection of student written work to assess progress and performance alignment   Teacher Class Credit Analysis Data-Custom Report-January  Report Cards-October, December, February    Midterms and finals  MOTP Analysis  Classroom Observations, pre and post meetings   New Teacher PD Meetings  Individualized planning meetings with teachers who have rated below 3.0 out of 4.0. Student Leader Meetings with Principal and administrative staff We use the marking period report card period to review student credit attainment horizontally and vertically; we will also use the mid year Regents reports to assess student Regents attainment and program accordingly for the next term based on the data findings. Additionally, we are using rubrics to assess the relationship between lesson plans and student work product to address the POP-Alignment of Task and Performance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instruments of measure will include:  Regents data analysis  Credit attainment analysis  Problem Of Practice (POP) Alignment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In terms of Social Emotional Development and support which reflects directly in student learning, JKO has implemented a variety of internal structures and engaged in a series of professional collaborations designed to meet the community needs while also respecting the individual needs of our parents and students. The elements noted below were designed to align daily school management realities and our dedication to the social-emotional realities our students present. The notable strengths in structures and collaborations at JKO are:  Communication: 1. Newsletters are written and emailed in English and Spanish to the parents and guardians 2. SKEDULA is used by the faculty to provide parents and students with real-time updates on student progress 3. Automated phone system 4. JKO Website 5. Administrator, Teacher and Counselor Guidebooks are updated annually 6. Weekly Department Meetings 7. Weekly Grade Level Meetings 8. New Teacher Induction 9. Teacher support meetings 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22  10. Weekly Update emails to whole staff 11. Walk through and observation feedback  Personnel: JKO provides direct student support by employing three counselors who meet with students to address social, personal and/or cultural concerns as well as scholarship and academic progress. Additionally an AIDP counselor is provided for students designated as SWD. In lieu of the Inwood House support program, Catch personnel will provide additional social/emotional support to enhance student support.  Teachers also conference with students throughout the term and email concerns to the counselors and AP PPS. The AP PPS and APS coordinate to manage Special Education academic and compliance needs and we have an IEP Coordinator. Facilitating the development of the knowledge, skills, and self-esteem needed to set life goals, make responsible decisions, and avoid teenage pregnancy; and  o Providing a continuum of care for pregnant and parenting teens in foster care that builds on their strengths and moves them toward self-sufficiency. We need to attain a greater degree of systemic consistency in how we address the issue; we will provide PD to our constituents at the SLT meetings and coordinate with the PA to ensure parents are well informed. The Principal and AP PPS will provide the PD and monitor the growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in student credit attainment as evinced by rigorously-structured student work products aligned to engaging curricula based on a coherent set of beliefs about how student learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers will use the sub group data for African American and Latino males to identify who is to be mentored as part of the grade level teams. Students Lessons will be reviewed for how well task and performance are aligned as evinced by student level of active intellectual engagement in the observation process. Students Based on the ENL data, student data for pupils in this sub group will be used by the teachers to differentiate and support student needs. Students Based on the Regents and credit attainment data culled, term 3 classes will be provided to support student needs. Students Complex thinking structures will be used by the teachers to transition from summative and comparative measures to synthesis, analysis and critique as evinced by the lesson construction and student class engagement. Students October 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Principal & Assistant Principals Principal & Assistant Principals Principal & Assistant Principals Principal & Assistant Principals Principal & Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and Guardians will be engaged through a variety of mechanisms, namely: *Three Parent-Teacher meetings--Teachers and Administrators *PupilPath as part of the on line grading system-AP PPS *JKO website-Ms. Alvarez, Teacher *SLT Monthly Meeting-Principal *Surveys-APO *Curriculum Night Event-COSA Team (Teachers) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24  *AP Pot Luck Event-AP Teachers *Instructional Fairs (Core Subjects)-Administrators--APPPS, APO and Principal *CTE Event-Business Teachers and Principal *Texts and Phone calls *School Website *School Events *PC Workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources needed to implement this year’s action plan are:  Use FSF to pay per session for teachers and administrators who work with the students and manage the after-school events.  Use school facilities such as Food Services and building management to provide the school space for events.  Schedule personnel (PC, APs, and Principal) time to meet and guide student activities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will use the teacher scholarship reports and January Regents data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instruments of measure will include: Scholarship Reports   Regents Results Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our data analysis illustrates that our work in Professional Development (PD) continues with Domains 3B, 3C and 3D. Some 12% of the teachers were rated as Ineffective with another 24% rated as Developing. Teacher support and collaboration includes the following:  Teachers meet individually with the principal at the start of the term for IPCs .  New teachers to the system and teachers with uneven teaching practices are enrolled in our Residency program  PD has been used to inform teachers of ENL, Special Education, and literacy strategies  PD focused on an analysis of best practices related to the use of Questioning and Discussion Techniques, student engagement (4 gear cycle), Zone of Proximal Development, scaffolding, literacy shifts, and writing learning objectives  PD also focuses on understanding the psychology of success as evinced by DeBono's Six Thinking Hats  The teacher guidebook outlines the strategies to be used.  Personal Pedagogical Goals (PPGs) are written for each teacher after conferencing with the Principal or Assistant Principal, but are based on the goals and foci predicated on the 2017-2018 teacher summary exit meeting letters.  New teacher PD will be offered individually and/or collectively by department and school wide.  Teachers will be instructed how to align Pre-assessment data was used to determine student needs. Lessons will use a combination of scaffolding, differentiated and literacy-based structures to vary the  instructional processes. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26   Teachers will be informed how to differentiate assessments for content and student learning  Department chairpersons will coordinate with department members to develop class projects used to provide different points of entry to the scholarship.  Teachers will use SKEULA and Atlas Rubicon and learn how to leverage the data to inform the instructional process. Domains 1.1 , 1.2 and 2.2 have been defined as developing based on the Quality Review process. According to the School Quality Snapshot data, English and Science have been assessed as “good” when helping students improve form their incoming proficiency levels and pass Regents exams, but we are only fair in Math and United States History with a rating of poor for Global History. Based on this data analysis, we believe that teacher use of data systems ranging from ADVANCE to SKEDULA, and Custom Reports as well as longitudinal trend analyses initiative within departments must continue as we revise our practices to address the increased literacy deficits our incoming students have in English and Mathematics. To more definitively support teacher efforts and align practices we will continue with the following structural processes: A. Training/supporting new teachers and those who return in the effective use of web-based systems of ATLAS Rubicon, SKEDULA and Custom Reports B. Coordinating with the teacher liaison committee members to assess teacher and student needs and to have the team members begin to observe classes with the administrators to help in the continued development of the assessment process. C. Creating school wide and individual progress report letters will be generated within each term and mailed to the parents-guardians seeking to keep constituents informed and to seek assistance in maximizing student learning. D. Standardizing and aligning the midterms and finals with team leaders will ensure accurate assessment of student progress and content retention for the school learning community Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher team members will collaboratively analyze the alignment of planning structures (Lesson plans and Units of study) to assess the alignment of tasks to student performance resulting in a 5% increase in Teacher measurement growth Advance Domain 3b. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers will meet in PD session held on Mondays of each month for two sessions to understand and re-align the curriculum maps Teachers Teachers liaisons will meet two Tuesdays a month with the principal to share student work evaluation protocols and to review other protocols such as the inter visitation and instructional rounds process to align expectations and practices. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal of Supervision & Principal Assistant Principal of Supervision & Principal Each term, the teachers will meet for an 8-week cycle to evaluate student work by subject area to evaluate goals, successes, challenges, previous instruction which resulted in a certain outcome and to develop and then implement new instructional strategies. Teachers will use a standardized student work protocol format devised by the APS in concert with teacher team members. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal of Supervision & Principal Student data culled from in-school assessments, SKEDULA, NYC School Accounts and custom reports will be used to analyze trends and further inform the inquiry process. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal of Pupil Personnel Services-Data Specialist, Assistant Principal of Supervision & Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and Guardians will be engaged through a variety of mechanisms, namely: *Three Parent-Teacher meetings--Teachers and Administrators *PupilPath as part of the on line grading system-AP PPS *JKO website-Ms. Alvarez, Teacher *SLT Monthly Meeting-Principal 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  *Surveys-APO *Curriculum Night Event-COSA Team (Teachers) *AP Pot Luck Event-AP Teachers *Instructional Fairs (Core Subjects)-Administrators--APPPS, APO and Principal *CTE Event-Business Teachers and Principal Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources needed to effectively implement the action plan are:  Using FSF to purchase the Atlas Rubicon license and developing a web-based system for the school for  immediate access. Scheduling PD time for teachers to review, understand and implement the Atlas Rubicon Curriculum Mapping system.  Dedicating Administrator time to create, share and then implement the student work protocols for each    department. Scheduling time with teacher leader liaisons to share processes and address concerns. Stipulating specific check-in points for the teacher leader liaisons and APS to share with the principal not only systemic progress but trend analysis findings of student performance. Scheduling time for the AP PPS –Data Specialist to generate the reports and for the APS to then assess teacher usage-implementation of report data in the planning cycle. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The monitoring process will be framed as follows: There will be a 10% of of Latino and African American male students in the bottom third who attain 10-plus credits. There will be a 5% increase in ENL students attaining 10-plus credits. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Initial IPC and midyear meetings and summary letters memorializing the most salient points   Observations and walkthroughs designed, in part, to assess how teachers are implementing best practices.  The use of ADAVANCE data analysis for Domain 3B by the administrators and individual teachers in individual and collective PD sessions designed to assess progress and the domain’s relationship with Domains 3C and 3D.  Newsletters structured to reinforce best practices. Infusing the findings from observations and walkthroughs to inform cabinet and Leadership teams which will ultimately influence the development of the school wide PD plan. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. For 2018-2019, the development of individual Personal Pedagogical Goals (PPGs) will be realized based on individual teacher meetings with the administrator who serves as the department head or direct report. Administrators will use the previous terms exit meeting summary letters/documents to discern the initial goal and to discuss the viability of the goal based on time away from the school for the summer session. Previously constructed goals are emailed to the teaching community in August of any given year for review and updating where required. New teachers to the building meet with the principal at the start of the fall term to develop the year-long PPG; all goals are aligned to addressing the Problem Of Practice (POP), literacy and teacher MOTP areas of growth. An analysis of the school program, successes and challenges is effected at the end of each school year and used to inform protocols for the new school year. An assessment of incoming students, plus a dissection of the related testing data are used to frame the programmatic structure of the new school year. Strategic decisions for 2018-2019 will include:  Interview and hiring process for the community there will be a focus on ENL and SE supports as well as how to support African American and Latino young men in their studies. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 31   Continuing to build upon the successes had in developing the school’s website.  Purchase of Skedula and Roundabout to support student learning needs.  Using the New Teacher Finder to hire new teachers to the school or the system as a whole.  Completion of CTE program to attain certification  Retaining the Parent Coordinator (PC) position  Use of Residency Program  Purchase of new PD materials for teachers  Purchase of CCLS-aligned curriculum supports  Join the Equal Opportunity Schools Network to support the Advanced Placement (AP) program. The ADVANCE system is used to memorialize teacher observations. We meet with teachers for pre-observations related to formal observations; pre-observations based on teacher agreement for informal observations. We also provide a post observation meeting for each teacher for all observations to ensure that we are aligned and the teacher is receiving the appropriate support. The Assistant Principals will coordinate with the Principal to assume the title as Department Chairs based on our recent reorganization. The APS will manage the Humanities (Social Studies, Art and English) component; the APO will guide Math and Science Departments. The Principal will serve as the department Chair for Business and Physical Education. The AP PPS will manage the AIS and Attendance teams. The AP PPS will also manage the compliance measures for ENL and Special Education The IEP Coordinator position will be allocated to a teacher based on program ability. The AP PPS, like the Principal, will share the observation process with the APO and APS who will coordinate with the Principal and AP PPS for direct support . Administrators will meet with teachers for individualized PD aligned to most recent observation and data trends. Anyone who rates below 3.0 in an ADVANCE area meets twice a month with the principal to review the area of concern and create a plan of action. MOTP Trackers are produced four times a year and shared with teachers; meetings to assess the areas of growth and needed growth are scheduled with the Principal. Inter-visitations will be embedded as part of the school culture and will be rated under Domain 4. Based on administrator analysis of MOTP outcomes to align teachers of pedagogical need with peers who may need assistance. Specifically, new teachers are to visit peers to help them develop self-assessment techniques and self-realization. Domains are analyzed for strength and teachers are aligned based on the data. Teachers visit peers from other subject strands such as English and Science, Math and Social Studies which is designed to eliminate subject related prejudice so teachers may concentrate on the techniques. ADVANCE data, ENL, Special Education and Advance Placement curricula are used to frame planning practices and establish data streams. One of the strengths of the community has been the observation and teacher feedback process as evinced by the fact that in addition to memorialized walkthroughs, the administrative team completed all mandated observations given extraordinary circumstances--two teachers added to the team in March for an additional 10 observations and the loss of an administrator during the term. The use of school-based computer-web-based systems such as SKEDULA, custom reports, attendance reports, QR findings, survey findings and NYSESLAT and Special Education data systems are used to inform the organizational and instructional processes also serves as a strength of the school community. We share the SMART goals, SCEP goals and the mission and vision statements with our faculty as part of the Teacher and Counselor handbook, but we need to embed them in the consciousness of our constituents. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. School leaders will create and implement a professional development plan that builds teachers’ capacity to use differentiated questioning and discussion techniques for students in all classes, resulting in a 10% increase in teachers improving one performance level reflected in component 3b Questioning and Discussion Techniques in the Advance system . 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administrators will use the data culled from the walk through and observation cycles to assess department-wide and school-wide effectiveness in the use of question and discussion techniques. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 School wide and individual PD will be held with teachers to assess the implementation of meaningful questions to foster class discussions. Observations will be used to assess the relationship between planning and implementation. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administrators will assess lesson plans to review the structure and sequence of questions as a function of our analysis of the Problem Of Practice. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Lesson plan structures will be revised to create a uniformed structure that will reflect the effective planning of questions and the anticipated conversations to be had. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Assistant Principal of Pupil Personnel Services, Assistant Principal of Supervision & Principal Assistant Principal of Pupil Personnel Services, Assistant Principal of Supervision & Principal Assistant Principal of Pupil Personnel Services, Assistant Principal of Supervision & Principal Assistant Principal of Pupil Personnel Services, Assistant Principal of Supervision & Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and Guardians will be engaged through a variety of mechanisms, namely: *Three Parent-Teacher meetings--Teachers and Administrators *PupilPath as part of the on line grading system-AP PPS 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  *JKO website-APO *SLT Monthly Meeting-Principal *Surveys-APO *Parent Outreach held one day a week-PC to monitor *Curriculum Night Event-COSA Team (Teachers) *AP Pot Luck Event-AP Teachers *Instructional Fairs (Core Subjects)-Administrators--AP PPS, APO and Principal *CTE Event-Business Teachers and Principal Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources needed to effectively implement the action plan are: Scheduling FSF funds to provide teachers with relevant PD Schedule shortened PD day each Wednesday to provide teacher support.    Reschedule administrative power to provide for norming which will in turn provide the teachers with more comprehensive feedback  Rescheduling and revising PC role-responsibilities  To schedule individual teacher meetings with the Principal to assess alignment  To use Title 1 100.3 to fund external PD support Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring used as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement at JKO is: ADVANCE data analysis of each teaching domain will be culled and analyzed to determine strengths and areas of need. Presently, we seek to improve the overall rating for Question and Discussion from 2.07 to 3.0. Regents and Scholarship reports will be used to assess student growth measures; a 5% increase in credit attainment will be realized by February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  1. Scholarship Reports 2. Regents Data analysis 3. Observation and walk through summary document 4. Planning documents illustrating improvement in development of plans. 5. MOTP Data analysis reports 6. QR Findings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School strengths and needs are denoted for review as of the most recent surveys: Strengths:  100% of families of a child in an Individualized Education Program (IEP) say that their school offers a wide variety of activities and services (including related services and assistive and adaptive technologies where appropriate) to help improve life outcomes for their child. (Q9c)  100% of families of a child in an Individualized Education Program (IEP) say that their school works to achieve the goals on their child's IEP. (Q9b)  91% of families say that they are satisfied with the education their child has received this year. (Q5b)  98% of families say that at their school their child is safe. (Q2e)  95% of families say that their school will make them aware if there are any emotional or psychological issues affecting their child's academic performance. (Q2d) Needs: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37    Some 50% of the parents/guardians actively used the SKEDULA system to remain in direct contact with the school community and to monitor student progress. Some 53% of teachers state students are intellectually challenged. School Climate needs to be improved with collective constituent involvement. Some 50% of teachers say that students have to work hard to do well. (Q20c)  Creating a stronger cultural connection in our work is a need as evinced by the teacher survey results--some 47% of the teachers say that they receive support around how to incorporate students' cultural and linguistic backgrounds in their practice. (Q2a)  Continuing to establish high expectations as part of a common ethos is a need as evinced by teacher survey results which stated 69% of teachers say that teachers are actively trying to improve their teaching. (Q1b) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 7% increase in student attendance as evinced by the effective and efficient use of grade level team structures we will create a welcoming environment for families. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Special events such as dances, student trips and in-school activities will be designed and implemented to foster a supportive and comfortable learning environment for students. Students Teachers, counselors and administrators will work collaboratively per grade level to adopt small groups of students. The staff will serve as a direct liaison for the parents and the school to provide outreach and support. Students and parents September 2018-July 2019 September 2018-July 2019 Administrators, counselors and teachers Administrators, counselors and teachers Administrators will work with teachers to ensure they consistently use checks for understanding designed to make on-the-spot instructional adjustments for individual and groups of students. Administrators will also focus on teachers providing students with opportunities to self-assess their work. Monthly assessment meetings will be held within grade level and PD will be aligned to support the work. Teachers September 2018-July 2019 Assistant Principal of Pupil Personnel Services, Assistant Principal of Supervision, Parent Coordinator & Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parents and Guardians will be engaged through a variety of mechanisms, namely: *Three Parent-Teacher meetings--Teachers and Administrators *PupilPath as part of the on line grading system-AP PPS *JKO website-Ms. Alvarez, Teacher *SLT Monthly Meeting-Principal *Surveys-APO *Curriculum Night Event-COSA Team (Teachers) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39  *AP Pot Luck Event-AP Teachers *Instructional Fairs (Core Subjects)-Administrators--APPPS, APO and Principal *CTE Event-Business Teachers and Principal Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Scheduling Tax Levy funds to purchase SKEDULA system ● Scheduling the PC and administrators to work with parents to foster meaningful Parent Workshops ● Scheduling Tax Levy funds to purchase PhoneMaster system to send consistent messages to homes ● Scheduling Title 3 funds to engage parents in after school cultural activities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will monitor progress as follows: 1. We will in a formative and summative manner assess student attendance data. 2. Pedagogues will meet directly with individual students (and in small groups of students) to track progress in the class setting. Ilog data will be reviewed as well as SKEDULA outreach data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Agendas and summary documents for meetings held will be collected, collated and analyzed on a monthly basis by administrative team members.  Newsletters, letters and emails will be used to communicate with constituents.  Minutes of meetings held with PC will be memorialized and action plans created to foster greater parent engagement and team building.  AIS and counselor meetings will include an analysis of parent outreach and responses to determine progress. Survey data will be reviewed by administration and teacher leadership team to assess improvement and determine next steps. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Review of middle school data assessments provided in ATS, SESSIS, etc. Review of middle school data assessments provided in ATS, SESSIS, etc. Science Social Studies Review of middle school data assessments provided in ATS, SESSIS, etc. Review of middle school data assessments provided in ATS, SESSIS, etc. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Introducing the writing revolution writing program 8 additional periods of math for Integrated Algebra, 1 double period AP Calculus course, two second year Algebra classes for students who need 4 semesters to master the content. After school Regents tutoring in Integrated Algebra, Geometry and Trigonometry 2 sections of Genetics Tutoring for all Science Regents courses 1 ELL ICT class taught by a Social Studies teacher and an ELL teacher A writing Wednesdays program aligned to the English Program Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group During the school day Small Group, Tutoring During the school day, after school tutoring Small Group, Tutoring During the school day, after school tutoring Small Group, Tutoring During the school day 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Based on guidance counselor, school psychologist and social worker recommendations as well as individual student request. Teen Choice Program, individual and group counseling services, classroom discussions on depression, self-esteem, healthy relationships Small Group, Tutoring During the school day 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Presently, we have 54 students in temporary housing. (22 in shelters, 5 in temporary living situations and 25 in doubled up situations, 1 in a hotel and 1 awaiting foster care.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  Funds are used to purchase supplies such as clothing and basic hygiene needs. The PC and AP PPS coordinate with the counselors to provide additional daily support. Counselors provide counseling support. Computers are provided for student use. Students are provided with class work support via the SKEDULA system. Counselors are charged with monitoring and supporting students which includes coordinating with teachers to ensure students needs are met. Social Work support is provided in-house and via external agencies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In 2018-2019, we expect to replace 32% of our teachers because of retirement, movement to other school levels, excess and discontinuances. We use a variety of resources to create a pool of candidates who are then assessed for skill and subject area knowledge. We often begin with the New Teacher Finder system coupled with a call for a list of available teachers in a given subject area to the HR Director for our Borough Support Network. We also review the Open Market Hiring System, and we have sent emails to colleagues to gather names of worthy candidates. We also access the ESSS. We then access the DOE systems to review existing files; I review previous ratings, incidents, etc. A list is culled and the teachers of interest are asked to interview with the Assistant Principal of Supervision and members of the existing teaching staff. The surviving candidates are then funneled to me for a second level interview; it is at this interview I provide them with a Danielson-based assessment. I am trying to assess how the candidates react to pressure as well as how well skilled they are during the interview. Coupled with the new teachers hired for last year, we will have a staff whereby approximately 44% of the teachers will be first and/or second year teachers. Once hired, we need to work to retain pedagogical services. We begin by providing each teacher with an electronic version of the teacher and counselor handbook for JKOHS. We meet individually with each teacher at the beginning of the year and collectively to ensure that they are progressing well. We have realigned the administrative responsibilities to ensure that there is an administrator for each discipline; teachers in each department are to consider these administrators as their direct supports. The principal will make himself available weekly with new hires informally and observes classes as part of the MOTP and as part of the walk through process. Lead teachers for each department coordinate with each new member and share pertinent information, such as electronic pay access needs, medical selection, etc. with the payroll secretary. When working with instruction, the lead teachers coordinate with the Assistant Principal of Supervision to ensure that all members understand the pedagogical process. All teachers, new or not so new, will receive pre-observations in meetings held with the aligned administrator or with the Principal. Individual data meetings are held with each teacher and an administrator and a Scholarship Summary Letters are placed in their files. The teacher files have been restructured to mimic system requirements. The folders 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  are located in the Principal’s office and are divided into the following competencies: IMPACT ON STUDENT LEARNING, INSTRUCTIONAL PRACTICE and PROFESSIONAL CONTRIBUTIONS. Teachers are encouraged to visit the office to place materials into the files whenever it is convenient as the files are viewed as ACTIVE for all staff members. These files, it is understood, will be used at the end of the year to assist determining individual teacher ratings. Teachers have full access to the administrative staff and counselors throughout the term via email and are encouraged to share questions, findings and needs with these constituents as often as wished. Often times, teachers visit with the Principal to discuss general matters. The Principal is in the habit of visiting teacher spaces (tutoring center, conference areas, and mail box area) to simply discuss the world at large. The Principal tries to create a strong professional connection to stem the tide of teacher flight which the system suffers from historically. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We have determined that our Professional Development needed to be more universal in order to address the students and then the academic needs. To this end, we plan to provide PD cleaved for those at different stages of development, namely first and second year teachers, year three to five and those who have more than five years of experience. The PD plan is structured to help the community assess the child irrespective of the subject domain. We believe that our teachers need to better understand the whole child in order to facilitate the learning process. We intend to build upon practices that will help define our students as lifelong learners. The PD will examine the Areas Of Focus (AOF) to align to the CCLS and the Domains. 1. Inform our practices to align to Domain 2B (Establish a Culture for Learning) 2. Use data to assess student needs and to initiate the corrective action. 3. Build cognitive capacity aligned to Domain 3C (Engaging Students In Learning). 4. Develop more Project Based Learning (PBL) class experiences which will align to empowering exceptional learners and focus teacher ability to use assessments in instruction (Domain 3D) We will provide PD for teachers as related to our movement toward the use of Learning Targets and the Writing Revolution. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NOT APPLICABLE 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46  NOT APPLICABLE Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). NOT APPLICABLE 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are involved in the decision-making policies at JKO as follows: 1. Teacher leaders meet with administrators on a weekly basis 2. Teacher leaders are provided with PD concerning data, QR outcomes and Advance Data systems which is then used in each department and across grade levels by the teacher leaders. 3. Teachers develop midterms, finals, and formative and summative class assessments within departments. 4. Teachers have chosen to use the ADVANCE pre and post CCLS Assessments 5. Teachers coordinate with administrators during pre-observation meetings. 6. Teachers meet with conference with the administrators individually in pre and post observation meetings as well as other individualized PD. 7. Teachers meet each Wednesday of the school year for PD for an hour and a half to review inquiry processes and assessments. 8. Teachers are offered the opportunity to develop/manage clubs. 9. Teachers are offered the opportunity to expand roles to include the roles of Parent Coordinator, NHS Coordinator, Climate Team, Equity Team, Curriculum team. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A-5E 5A-5E 5A-5E 5A-5E Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $326,009 $110, 557 0 $12, 366 0 3, 213,606 X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis High School] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our ENL population reflects a variety of cultures, academic backgrounds, and languages, whose diversity greatly enhances our school community. The ENL population consist of forty nine (49) students, of which fifteen (15) have special education status. Specifically, six (6) ninth graders, eleven (11) tenth graders, eleven (11) eleventh graders, and twenty one (21) twelve graders. Of those students, fifteen (15) are transitioning and thirty four (34) are at the expanding levels. Our title III enrichment after school program will be conducted starting on October 1, 2018 from 3:15 pm-4:15pm, every Tuesday and Thursday for twenty-four (24) weeks ending June 7, 2019. The program targets all our ELL students. Two (2) certified ENL teachers will teach students in further enhancing their academic language and will provide intensive ENL instruction with a focus on vocabulary development, reading, and academic reading. The two ENL certified teachers will team teach as follows, the ENL/ELA enrichment after school course will be taught by an ENL teacher and an ELA teacher. The ENL/Global History course will be co-taught by an ENL teacher and social studies teacher. Based on most recent NYSESLAT, and NYS Regents scores, as well as student analysis, our ELL’s need support in all four modalities. Specifically, reading and writing. Our student need additional support in ELA and History. All students served under the Title III program are in grades 9-12 and all instruction occurs in English with native language support. The native language support will be provided through the use of translation dictionaries, instructional materials handed out in the student's native language and peer sharing among students. Teachers will implement cooperative learning strategies where students work together in groups and teams to tackle assignments given by the teacher. Students also have the opportunity to enhance their literacy skills while individually performing tasks. The Title III supplemental program helps ENL students with their reading, vocabulary and language enhancement. Therefore, allowing students to enhance their academic English skills and improve their writing skills in different genres. Materials purchased with Title III funds to support the program are: -Short stories, novels, non-fiction, informational text will be used for reading assignments and class work. Some of the materials will be purchased from Title III funds, others will be used from resources available in the school. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: The Title III professional development will consist in the ENL teacher participation in the MFSC ELL professional learning series. The ENL teacher will participate in the professional development indicated below and will share information will the other Title III teachers during the Monday and Tuesday mandated Professional Developments in school from 8 am until 8:45am. The ELL Leads Workshop series for HS (5 sessions) The series of workshops will facilitate continuous learning among ELL educators. Each session aims to deepen participants' understanding and knowledge of ELL policies and effective instruction. The instructional focus is on literacy across disciplines Topics include: Topic One: Knowledge-building approach to developing language – Unit Design in Advanced Literacy Framework Dates: 9/21/18 Topic Two: Design learning tasks in content area units Dates: 10/30/18 Topic Three: Scaffold Interactive Learning tasks in units Dates : 12/4/18 Topic Four: Bring It Together – Units for ENL Co-teaching and Stand-Alone Classrooms Dates: 01/17/19 Topic Five: Share of Learning – What Was the Impact on Learning? 02/04/19 All sessions are provided from 9am until 2:30pm by the ELL services administrator from the MFSC. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: In addition to increasing student and staff development, JKO is dedicated to empowering our parents by providing them with the resources that they need In order to help their children be successful both academically and personally. In order to ensure parents of ENLs are provided with strategies, tools, and resources to support their children's academic success and growth, monthly workshops will be provided to them. There will be a total of four (4) specific ENL parent workshops that will be provided throughout the academic year. Topics to be Covered: September 27, 2018- JKO ENL Program and it's Benefits; October 24, 2018- Study Habits Strategies for ENLs; March 6, 2019 - How to Help Your Child Increase their English Language Skills and Literacy; April 3, 2019- NYSESLAT Preparation and How it Will Affect Your Child. Workshops will be held from 5-6pm. The two ENL teacher and ENL counselor will be paid four hours of per session for the four workshops by Title III funds. Parents will be provided refreshments and materials pertaining to the specific topic. The parental workshops will be provided by Parent Coordinator, two ENL Teachers, ENL Counselor and Coordinator. Translation and interpretation will be provided. Parents and 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities guardians will be notified of the workshops through letters mailed home, as well as phone calls and emails/Skedula. Parents will be provided with various handouts and materials pertaining to the specific topics discussed in each workshop. The handouts and resources will be translated in their home language. Parents will be provided with refreshments and snacks. All materials, including refreshments, will be at cost through Title III funding. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis High School Borough Manhattan School Number 529 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Edward DeMeo Coach Not Applicable ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Maribel Nieves Teacher/Subject Area John Hammond/History Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Erika Guttzeit/Speech Superintendent Marisol Rosales Assistant Principal Steve Athanasakis Coach Not Applicable School Counselor Nicole Vega Parent Marivic Nazares Parent Coordinator Antonio Orridge Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 600 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60 Total number of ELLs 51 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.50%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? For the ELLs, the results of the assessment exams and 2016 NYSESLAT, were closely reviewed. The results of the 2016 NYSESLAT showed that out of forty-three(43) students tested fourteen (14) students made gains overall. Three (3) scored at the commanding level and fourteen (14) moved up in ELL level. These results show that the expanding and transitioning students generally perform better on the NYSESLAT exam than students at the emerging level. However, compared to the general education classes, ELLs generally perform at lower levels than their peers. However, there are individual ELLs that show exceptional performance in math and reading as compared to their peers. Most expanding and transitioning students are behind their peers academically. The gap between the ELLs and general education students is more clearly defined, although there are similar trends. These results reinforce the greater need for a greater focus on the development of students’ academic language and the integration of adapted and differentiated content area materials. Teacher created assessments coupled with student data from state exams allow administration and teachers to develop 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61  curriculum and instructional lessons that are reflective of student individual need. The insight on student progress helps the teachers and staff make informed decisions regarding tailoring their instruction to the individual needs of each student. This data also gives us insight on the students that need academic intervention services in particular content areas so that we may provide additional support and services. This data will help teachers scaffold content area skills and concepts for our ELL population. Administration and teachers use the data from these assessment tools to individualize the students schedule based on their needs, differentiate instruction, consider improvements in content areas, and create or discontinue programs/services provided to the ELL population. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers collaborate with administration, subject departments and staff to create curriculum and instruction that supports the academic needs of the students. Department meetings, grade level meetings as well as professional development meetings are held to ensure collaboration among staff in creating curriculum and strengthening instructional practices that support the needs of our ELL student population. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of the ENL program by using various assessment tools to determine student and program success. Tools such as the NYSESLAT modality report, reviewing adequate yearly progress, and AMAO data is used to evaluate the student's progress and the success of the ELL program. It was determined that low NYSESLAT writing and reading scores are the primary factors preventing students from reaching the commanding level. This issue is being addressed with an increased emphasis on writing and reading mechanics, as evinced by the increased numbers of writing labs, web-based support, installation of the READ 180 program and tutoring. The primary area of concern at JKO is the low academic achievement of many of our ELL students, as measured by results on State standardized tests. A review of the spring’s recent exams, formative and summative assessment, ELL Periodic Assessments AMAO and the NYSESLAT of 2016 confirms that JKO ELL students are testing poorly; approximately 74% of the students consistently fail the State Regents Exams and 73.9% of the students pass class instruction. According to the data, our students' greatest areas of need are Global, United States History, and Mathematics--both State testing and class credit acquisition. However, with Mathematics students are more proficient with credit acquisition as oppose to passing the Algebra, Geometry, or Trigonometry Regents Exams. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Based on the results of the 2016 NYSESLAT Exams, we are using this data to program students based on their various needs. We are programming based on literacy, communication/fluency of the English language, and individual graduation needs. This will aid the teachers in better servicing the students and tackling the specific academic issue that individual students need to improve class credit acquisition and state exam passing rates. As a result of the data from the NYS Regents exams, we have implemented more programs to aid the students. Programs such as mandated tutoring during student lunch periods and after school, academic intervention services, one on one help from teacher assistants and teachers, co-teaching in mainstream classes, and specific regents professional development for ENL teachers. The school's action plan includes aligning resources based on need and analysis of the Progress Report data. From this review, other programs such as literacy support and ENL Labs are being used in conjunction with well-established structures, Differentiated Learning practices, ICT for Social Studies, English support classes like Read 180, Common Core Standards (CCLS) and protocols to provide programmatic and instructional support 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not Applicable 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data from the NYSITELL indicates that when newly admitted students are tested they tend to show strong Native Language skills and will score at the advanced level or are proficient. Data patterns across proficiency levels and grades reveal 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62  that ELLS are performing at varied academic levels. The patterns indicate that every year more students are testing out of ENL status based on the NYSESLAT. However, in analyzing their academic data these same students are struggling academically especially when it comes to passing their regents examinations. As a result, we will need to provide these students with academic int According to the 2016 NYSESLAT Exam, three (3) students were rated commanding, twenty-seven (27) students were at the expanding level, eleven (11) students were at the transitioning level and two (2) students scored emerging. Fourteen (14) students improved, either advancing to the next level or were rated commanding. An analysis of the three year trend with the NYSESLAT exam indicates, ELL students are making gains in levels and proficiency every year. However, there are also a substantial number of ELLs that are remaining at the same level, moved back in level and not making any gains. Among the ten (10) ninth grade students tested in the NYSESLAT, eight (8) students made gains in levels, one (1) remained at the same level and three (3) were commanding. Among sixteen (16) tenth graders tested nine (9)students made gains, three (3) were rated commanding, two (2) moved back in level and two (2) remained at the same level. Among ten (10) eleventh graders tested, six (6) students gained a level, four (4) were rated commanding, one (1)remained at the same level and three (3) had incomplete scores or were absent. Among six (7) twelfth graders tested, one (1) student made a gain in level, two (2) remained at the same level, one (1) was commanding and three (3) had incomplete scores or were absent. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The data is closely viewed and disaggregated by the ENL teachers, ENL coordinator and administration. This data will help in adjusting instruction and curriculum based on student needs. We will be able to focus on the areas of weakness based on the data, while continuing to build on the student's areas of strength. ENL teachers and administration will also inform content teachers regarding this data so they may differentiate and tailor instruction based on student data. Based on the data, teacher feedback and assessments, programs for the ELL students will be adjusted and various forms of strategies and practices will be revised. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. It is the goal as a reflective school community to provide an educational policy for English Language Learners (ELLs) that aligns with New York City performance standards, ENL Standards, Primary Literacy Standards, Common Core Standards (CCLS) and NYS Learning Standards. We use ELL data to inform our program goals and instructional practices across the grades, providing continuity as the ELLs progress programmatically. English as a New Language (ENL) is taught through an integrated curriculum that includes reading, writing, listening, and speaking. Continuous articulation between our ENL teachers and content classroom teachers ensures that content-based ENL instruction is complimentary to what students are learning in their mainstream classrooms. The Freestanding ENL program is a stand alone model program. In addition to ENL classes, we have Global History, U.S. History and Participation in Government/Economics courses that are co-team taught with a mainstream History teacher in addition to the ENL teacher. Students learn to focus on language acquisition techniques, such as scaffolding and language experience approach. This helps students and enables them to perform well when they are in their mainstream classrooms. Specific attention is also given to literacy, writing and vocabulary development. ENL teachers use a variety of instructional materials in their classes. All teachers teaching ELL students use materials that are used in the monolingual classes and adapt them as is necessary. ELLs who have been assessed below reading level are provided with READ 180 classes, which is a comprehensive instructional system that accelerates the learning of students who enter high school two or more years behind in literacy. This class provides 90 minutes of daily 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63  instruction, teaches phonics, comprehension, vocabulary, fluency, and writing explicitly. The class establishes classroom practices to engage rising readers in school, provide more instructional time, and helps teachers differentiate instruction; responds to the needs of ELLs and special needs ELLs. All models and programs are used for all levels of ELLs and those that are long term ELLs or receiving four to six years of services. The students are served in a stand alone model. ENL teachers work directly with the students to support participation in general education classrooms and provide direct and supplemental instruction. If a student is recognized as needing Collaborative Team Teaching /Integrated Co-Teaching services, they will be placed in classes that have a general education/ENL teacher as well as a special education teacher. These teachers work closely together to modify and adapt instruction based on the student’s needs. Students may also receive related services (speech and/or counseling), assistive technology, paraprofessional services (bilingual paraprofessional if necessary) and any other additional services needed. Programs and models used within the classroom for special education ELLs are: Common Core Standards (CCLS) and language experience approach. Students are also provided with academic and Regents/RCT tutoring as well as credit recovery classes if necessary. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not Applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis High School has an English Language Learner (ELL) program that is a Freestanding ENL design. The students are served in a stand alone model. The program is staffed with one full-time certified trained ENL teacher and one part-time ENL teacher who co-teaches history courses . ELL students are mainstreamed in all academic subjects in addition to specific reading, writing, and mathematics courses designed to help ELL students develop their English skills, develop knowledge and improve proficiency in other areas of study. In every content area Native Language Support books and glossaries are provided for the students. Students programs are tailored to fit specific academic need. Students are also scheduled to take Spanish as a foreign language. A. Entering level students receive 540 minutes of ENL instruction in combination with a co-teaching history course; Emerging and Transitioning level students receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction in combination with history co-teaching ; and Expanding level students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction with a combination of history co-teaching. In addition, all Expanding level students are programmed to receive monolingual English classes. Students that are at the commanding level will continue to receive ENL instruction and services for an additional two years after they reach commanding level. This may be through ENL stand alone or co-teaching history classes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. English as a New Language (ENL) is taught through an integrated curriculum that includes reading, writing, listening, and speaking. Continuous articulation between our ENL teachers and mainstream classroom teachers ensures that content-based ENL instruction is complimentary to what students are learning in their mainstream classes. Students are provided with their native language course in order to support their ENL program and status. This course will support their academic language and ties in their core subject areas. Students learn to focus on language acquisition techniques, such as scaffolding,Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and language experience approach. This helps students and enables them to perform well when they are in their mainstream classrooms. Specific attention is also given to writing and vocabulary development. The ENL teachers uses a variety of instructional materials in their classes. All teachers teaching ELL students use materials that are used in the monolingual classes and adapt them as is necessary. ELLs who have been assessed below reading level are provided with READ 180 classes, which is a comprehensive instructional system that accelerates the learning of students who enter high school two or more years behind in literacy. This class provides 90 minutes of daily instruction, teaches phonics, comprehension, vocabulary, fluency, and writing explicitly. The class establishes classroom practices to engage rising readers in school, provide more instructional time, and help teachers differentiate instruction; responds to the 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64  needs of ELLs and special needs ELLs. All models and programs are used for all levels of ELLs and those that are long term ELLs or receiving four to six years of services. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In every content area Native Language Support books and glossaries are provided for the students. Students programs are tailored to fit specific academic need. Students are also scheduled to take Spanish as a foreign language. The school’s language development component is planned by pedagogical analysis of transcripts and students skills via State assessments and school’s internal assessment inventories through the use of data and teacher assessments by administration, the ENL teachers and the ELL coordinator/counselor . Students with interrupted formal education (SIFE) as well as new comers and long term ELLs are in attendance. For those particular students intensive academic intervention services are provided to the student to meet their language and academic needs. For the native language speakers of Spanish, ENL teachers provide materials as well as one-to-one native language instruction 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SKEDULA and STARS data, class assessment data and standardized test data are used to differentiate the instructional program. Scholarship reports, individualized student data reports (custom reports) and professional conversations between pedagogues are used and assess student progress and performance. Subgroups (Bottom Third, ELL, and Special Education ELL) are analyzed and programs are established based on the thorough analysis of the stated data measures. The program has also incorporated Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT), which pairs a monolingual teacher with an ENL teacher in mainstream subject areas. English Language Learners (ELLs) in all grade levels are also provided with Global History, U.S. History, Participation in Government and Economics classes that are coupled with an English writing program designed to address instructional concerns revealed through pre-assessed academic needs assessment. These courses are taught by mainstream History teachers as well as an ENL teacher. English as a New Language (ENL) is taught through an integrated curriculum that includes reading, writing, listening, and speaking. Continuous articulation between our ENL teachers and classroom teachers ensures that content-based ENL instruction is complimentary to what students are learning in their mainstream classrooms. Students learn to focus on language acquisition techniques, such as scaffolding, Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and language experience approach. This helps students and enables them to perform better when they are in their mainstream classrooms. Specific attention is also given to writing and vocabulary development. The ENL teachers use a variety of instructional materials in their classes. All teachers teaching ELL students use materials that are used in the monolingual classes and adapt them as is necessary. ELLs who have been assessed below reading level are provided with READ 180 classes, which is a comprehensive instructional system that accelerates the learning of students who enter high school two or more years behind in literacy. This class provides 90 minutes of daily instruction, teaches phonics, comprehension, vocabulary, fluency, and writing explicitly. The class establishes classroom practices to engage rising readers in school, provide more instructional time, and help teachers differentiate instruction; responds to the needs of ELLs and special needs ELLs. All models and programs are used for all levels of ELLs and those that are long term ELLs or receiving four to six years of services. There are ELL students in the population who have special needs and as such require additional time and attention. The following procedures are used in such cases:A. For Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE), the following guidelines are followed: SIFE students are included in small groups for differentiated instruction, targeted assistance, and tutoring opportunities. Parents of SIFE students are invited to take part in workshops. B.. Programs and activities for newly enrolled Limited English Proficient (LEP) students include: the incorporation of ENL strategic instruction; assisting students in performing at grade level; and ensuring academic rigor and conceptual understanding through the use of literature and content-based instruction. However, because of student placement in mainstream classes while in the ENL program, additional support is embedded in the program. These students are provided with testing accommodations for two years and are allowed to use bilingual dictionaries. The plan for academic language development for new ELL students includes integration of ENL methodologies with curriculum materials from the content areas. Classroom content area material is adapted and used in an ENL setting. Consistent articulation with classroom teachers will ensure that the academic language 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65  targeted in ENL classes correlates and reinforces the concepts and language needed for current units of study. C/D. ELLs receiving four to six years of services or Long Term ELLs receive a full range of Academic Intervention Services (AIS), such as: academic counseling, alternative school placement if necessary, academic and regents tutoring, parent conferences, attendance outreach and referrals to outside agencies (counseling and academic intervention). E. Students who reach NYSESLAT commanding status are aided in their transition, from ELL to monolingual English classes, by their ENL teacher, mainstream teachers and counselor. At JKO, we strive for this transition to be seamless; therefore, these students are provided with additional support. However, these students will continue to receive ENL classroom support for up to two years after they reach commanding level and will continue to be placed in an ENL class in their schedule. This class will take place daily in their schedule. Credit and Regents/RCT acquisition data, teacher reports and recommendations, as well as data from SKEDULA are all used to assess the student in turn tailoring their program to meet the specific needs. The students will continue to have the option for two years to use translation dictionaries/glossaries and to take the Regents Exams in their Native Language. These students, as well as all students, are encouraged to join any and all activities. ELL students who require more than four years to graduate are surveyed on a case-by-case basis. Depending on their specific academic/behavioral needs, students may be referred to outside programs and community based organizations that will better serve their specific academic and personal needs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL program is provided with instructional materials and technological support such as NYSESLAT prep materials, READ 180 systems, novels, plays, novellas, smart boards, and computers. Students are also provided with translation dictionaries to aid them in all subject areas. Additionally, the program uses a wide array of instructional programs and measures to provide data in order to adjust the materials used in the classrooms. These programs and measures are used to differentiate instruction, tailor instruction and the curriculum, and to assess the success for ENL subgroups. These measures include SKEDULA, which provides teachers with historical and correct academic information regarding the students, AMAO, which helps us determine the student's progress with the various modalities and adequate yearly progress, which aides in viewing what subject areas the student may need more of a concentration on. Through these specific programs and tools, students schedules are tailored, instruction and materials are adjusted to meet their specific ENL needs and allows the teacher to place them in sub groups based on their needs and levels (i.e. literacy, writing, or speaking) 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Based on their Individualized Education Program (IEP) recommendations, students are provided with specific support services. If a child is recognized as a SETSS (Special Education Teacher Support Services) student, they will receive general education classes while receiving services from a special education teacher. The ENL teacher works directly with the students to support participation in general education classrooms and provide direct and supplemental instruction. If a student is recognized as a Integrated Co-Teaching student, they will be placed in classes that have a general education/ENL teacher as well as a special education teacher. The teachers work closely together to modify and adapt instruction based on the child’s needs. Students may also receive related services (speech and/or counseling), assistive technology, paraprofessional services (bilingual paraprofessional if necessary) and any other additional services needed. Programs and models used within the classroom for special education ELLs are: Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and language experience approach. Students are also provided with academic and Regents/RCT tutoring as well as other classes for credit recovery if necessary. All classes are taught in English to the ELL students. Any student, including ELLs, who take Spanish as a foreign language are taught primarily in Spanish. English Language Learners (ELLs) students also receive services from a host of other professionals, namely: four (4) school counselors, one (1) speech therapist, and one (1) school therapist. Students transitioning from middle-to-high school are required to attend a student/parent orientation. Students are required to take READ 180 classes and/or writing labs. All ELL students are invited to participate in all activities and after school programs that occur. They are also provided with a tutoring program held during their lunch and after school to aid in their academic growth, strengthen their performance levels and prepare for the NYS Regents Exams. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. There are a range of intervention services offered to ELLs for specific content areas at JKO. The range of services provided are based on data collect through SKEDULA, Individual Education Plans, teacher progress reports, scholarship data, literacy level, Bottom Third, Special Education ELLs, as well as credit and Regents acquisition. Students receiving long term ELLs services, SIFE students, and special education ELLs are specifically targeted for intervention programs. For the ninth graders, Regents and credit data from middle school is surveyed. In math, students are provided with math labs designed to enhance the instructional program while providing study strategies for Regents and credit acquisition. In the ELA content area, various assessment tools are used by the teachers to unearth student knowledge, skill and to better understand the specific needs of the student. Based on these assessments tools, students are provided with additional writing classes, academic tutoring embedded in their schedules, after school tutoring, supplemental instructional support and extra teacher support. In all content areas all ELLs are provided with academic and regents tutoring either after school or in their schedules, peer tutoring, and one on one teacher student tutoring. All of our services are offered in English, as we do not have students who are only dominant in their native language. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on the new state requirements to provide services to our ELL population, several priorities for improving ELL student performance have been identified. The primary goal is the implementation of effective strategies to address the larger number of students lacking basic skills in both reading and mathematics through the inclusion of more mathematics course options and extra tutoring/classes for reading and English. ELLs will also be provided with independent study labs, development of phonemic, phonological and print awareness, and homework strategies for those who struggle with reading and mathematics. Individual activities such as pre-reading activities and creative writing skills activities will also be carried out. Programs and improvements that the school is considering for the following school year is the incorporation of virtual labs for the science content areas. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not Applicable 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. At JKO H.S., all students’ programs are based on the assessments of individual data and specific systemic mandates (i.e. test modes). Overall, student programs are structured to provide every student with an equal and comprehensive education. To buttress this concept, programming is designed for seamless transition. We believe when a classroom is visited by an outside individual all students should be viewed through a single lens. Thus, a visitor should not know who ELL students are in any classes. All students at JKO, especially ELLs, are invited and encouraged to participate and partake in activities and programs held at the school. The ENL teacher will make announcements in the classrooms specifically inviting these students to participate in various school activities. Letters and phone calls are also made home through the school messenger to inform parents of the school activities occurring in the school community. Students are encouraged to attend workshops (i.e. college, financial aid, teen issues), special events (i.e. performances, holiday parties, environmental awareness activities), and clubs (i.e. poetry, debate, ping pong) so they may immerse themselves in the larger school community. These students partake in National Honors Society, Debate Club, Ping Pong Club, Dance Company, fundraisers, college trips, and a variety of other programs and activities at the school. After school and supplemental services are provide to ELL students in various ways. Students will be offered academic and regents tutoring to aide in the class and regents progress. However, some students will have these tutoring services embedded in their daily schedules and are mandated to attend. We also provide specific ELL tutoring within content areas as well as increasing their overall literacy and writing skills. Students are also encouraged to join and attend clubs held after school. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL program is provided with instructional materials and technological support such as NYSESLAT prep materials, READ 180 systems, novels, plays, novellas, smart boards, and computers. Students are also provided with translation 2018-19 SCEP-FF 67  dictionaries to aid them in all subject areas. Additionally, the program uses a wide array of instructional programs and measures to provide data in order to adjust the materials used in the classrooms. These programs and measures are used to differentiate instruction, tailor instruction and the curriculum, and to assess the success for ENL subgroups. These measures include SKEDULA, which provides teachers with historical and correct academic information regarding the students, AMAO, which helps us determine the student's progress with the various modalities and adequate yearly progress, which aides in viewing what subject areas the student may need more of a concentration on. Through these specific programs and tools, students schedules are tailored, instruction and materials are adjusted to meet their specific ELL needs and allows the teacher to place them in sub groups based on their needs and levels (i.e. literacy, writing, or speaking) Students recognized as ELLs receive tailored and customized activities to support their reading level. Students receive audio, visual, interactive lessons, containing explicit tutorial and on-going formative/summative assessments; learn at one's own pace and privacy without time constraints or pressure; given their course progress and the course adjusts accordingly to ensure student's achievement. SKEDULA data, AMAO data, class assessment data and standardized test data are used to differentiate the instructional program and determine materials used in the classroom. Scholarship reports, individualized student data reports (custom reports) and professional conversations between pedagogues are used and assess student progress and performance. Subgroups (Bottom Third, ELL, and Special Education ELL) are analyzed and programs are established based on the thorough analysis of the stated data measures. The program has also incorporated Integrated Co- Teaching (ICT), which pairs a monolingual teacher with an ENL teacher in mainstream subject areas. English Language Learners (ELLs) in all grade levels are also provided with History classes that are coupled with an additional English writing program designed to address instructional concerns revealed through pre-assessed academic needs assessment. This class is taught by a mainstream History teacher as well as the ENL teacher. English as a New Language (ENL) is taught through an integrated curriculum that includes reading, writing, listening, and speaking. Continuous articulation between our ENL teachers and classroom teachers ensures that content-based ENL instruction is complimentary to what students are learning in their mainstream classrooms. Students learn to focus on language acquisition techniques, such as scaffolding and language experience approach. This helps students and enables them to perform well when they are in their mainstream classrooms. Specific attention is also given to writing and vocabulary development. ENL teachers use a variety of instructional materials in their classes. All teachers teaching ELL students use materials that are used in the monolingual classes and adapt them as is necessary. ELLs who have been assessed below reading level are provided with READ 180 classes, which is a comprehensive instructional system that accelerates the learning of students who enter high school two or more years behind in literacy. This class provides 90 minutes of daily instruction, teaches phonics, comprehension, vocabulary, fluency, and writing explicitly. The class establishes classroom practices to engage rising readers in school, provide more instructional time, and help teachers differentiate instruction; responds to the needs of ELLs and special needs ELLs. All models and programs are used for all levels of ELLs and those that are long term ELLs or receiving four to six years of services. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The school’s language development component is planned by pedagogical analysis of transcripts and students skills via State assessments and school’s internal assessment inventories such as: teacher assessment and evaluations and Web based programs. In the ENL program we support the ELL student's by providing translation dictionaries, distributing handouts or instructional materials in their native language and provide them with tests in both the English and native language. The content area teachers also provide them with materials in both their native language and English language. Students with interrupted formal education (SIFE) as well as new comers and long term ELLs are in also provided with such materials and additional resources to help reinforce their language acquisition and native language support. For those particular students intensive academic intervention services are provided to the student to meet their language and academic needs. For the native language speakers of Spanish, ELL teachers provide materials as well as one-to-one native language instruction. Native language is used ti enhance their academic achievement. Students are enrolled in Spanish classes, not only to fulfill credit requirements, but to reinforce their Native Language skills. This will aide the students when they are administered the New York State Regents exam in their Native Language. In aiding content classrooms, as well as in the school library, ELLs are provided with a section of different books in the various Native Languages. These books will range from specific content areas to books that they can read at their leisure. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 68  At JKO H.S., support services and resources are tailored to the student's individual academic need. This may or may not correspond to the ELL's age and/or grade level. Student programs are structured to provide every student with an equal and comprehensive education. Based on their individual needs, students are provided with specific support services. The ENL teacher works directly with the students to support participation in general education classrooms and provide direct and supplemental instruction. Various support services and resources are provide to ELL students in various ways. Students will be offered academic and regents tutoring to aide in the class and regents progress. However, some students will have these tutoring services embedded in their daily schedules and are mandated to attend. PLATO for credit acquisition and recovery is offered to specific students who fit that need. The ENL counselor works closely with the students to ensure that the appropriate resources, whether academically or personally, are given to the student based on their individual needs. The counselor also collaborates with the teachers to ensure that the students are provided with the appropriate resources and services with the classroom setting. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Not Applicable 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Upon enrollment of new ELL students, the parent coordinator (Anthonio Orridge), ENL Counselor/Coordinator (Nicole Vega) and AP PPS (Steve Athanasakis) discuss activities and program options with the students and their parents at student orientation and during individual enrollment meetings. Programs and activities for newly enrolled ELL students and their parents include: the incorporation of ENL strategic instruction; assisting students in performing at grade level; ensure academic rigor and conceptual understanding through the use of literature and content-based instruction; and helping ELL students meet and/or exceed New York State and City standards. However, because of student placement in mainstream classes while in the ENL program, additional support is embedded in the program. Workshops for parents are provided throughout the school year on a myriad of academic and personal topics. These workshops are run by the various counselors, parent coordinator, Teen Choice program and Parent Association. We also, stress the importance of taking part in after school activities and clubs throughout the school year. This will help the students transition into the school by joining and partaking in various activities and clubs offered. Students transitioning from middle-to-high school are required to attend a student/parent orientation run by administration, parent coordinator and counselors during the summer months before school begins. Students and parents are given information regarding school programs, activities, graduation requirements, college preparation and readiness, rules and regulations and information vital to academic and personal success. Students are invited and strongly encouraged to participate in all activities and after school programs that occur during the school year. Activities and programs throughout the year are managed by various teachers that promote participation for all of our students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The language elective offered to ELLs is Spanish. Not only are they encouraged to take this class for Native Language Support, but it fulfills their foreign language requirement as well. Students who may be disinterested in taking Spanish have also obtained language electives through other programs, such as College Now. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable 2018-19 SCEP-FF 69  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? JKO hosts several mandatory professional development workshops dedicated to informing the JKO staff about ELL student needs. These workshops are an integrated part of the professional development calendar and take place every Monday throughout the school year. Topics include ENL strategies in the classroom, understanding NYSESLAT and ELL data, differentiated instruction, and cultural sensitivity and awareness. During these specific professional development meetings, staff will participate in various activites such as group work to develop different ways to tackle ELL issues within the classroom. All staff members, including administration and school secretaries, are dispatched to workshops and meetings throughout the city regarding specific ELL developments and specialized strategies to meet the needs of the ELL population. Teachers are dispatched to ENL professional development meetings that will pertain specifically to their content area. This is done so that all teachers may incorporate ENL strategies in their teaching practices. Records of professional development are maintained by a signed attendance sheet. Any staff who attends meetings outside the community are required to notify administration and provide the agenda or handouts from the professional development. Often times, strategies are turn keyed for peers during professional development sessions. Since the beginning of the school year, teachers have been provided with professional development pertaining to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and teaching practices. Before the CCLS was implemented, the administration was holding PDs pertaining to these standards that would be implemented in the new school year in order for teachers to be aware of what was going to be implemented. Topics include ENL strategies in the classroom, understanding NYSESLAT and ELL data, differentiated instruction, and cultural sensitivity and awareness. During these specific professional development meetings, staff will participate in various activities such as group work to strategically develop different ways to address ELL issues within the classroom. Teachers are also provided with outside professional development meetings, provided by the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support, pertaining to implementing these standards within the ENL classes. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All staff members, including administration and school secretaries, are dispatched to workshops and meetings throughout the city regarding specific ELL developments and specialized strategies to meet the needs of the ELL population. In addition to professional development meetings held every Monday at the school, teachers are provided with outside professional development meetings, provided by the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support, pertaining to implementing standards within the ENL classes. Teachers are dispatched to a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of ENL professional development meetings that will pertain specifically to their content area and focus on best practices, language acquisition and integrating language and content instruction in ELL classrooms. This is done so that all teachers may incorporate ENL strategies in their teaching practices. ENL teachers will attend a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of required professional development meetings that focus on best practices, ENL strategies, and language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction. Records of professional development are maintained by a signed attendance sheet kept on file by the payroll secretary. Any staff who attends meetings outside the community are required to notify administration and provide the agenda or handouts from the professional development meeting. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 70  At JKO, there are many events held including College Night, Financial Aid Night and Scholarship workshops. In addition to collaborating with staff members on developing specific workshops pertaining to our ELL population, the Parent Teacher Association President, ENL Counselor/Coordinator and Parent Coordinator also provides meetings which have workshops on specific ELL topics. These parent workshops are based on ELL academic/behavioral issues and how to support their ELL student through the use of native language. The events provide all parents, including ELL parents, the opportunity to meet teachers, counselors, and other staff members to become familiar with expectations and procedures. In order to accommodate the ELL parents, we provide native language interpretation and translation by bilingual staff members, including the Parent Association President or Principal Designee. The ELL counselor/coordinator also collaborates with the ELL teacher in holding individual parent meetings with the students and their parents on a yearly or bi yearly basis. These meetings address the academic/personal needs of the student, addresses particular concerns of the student and parents, sets academic and personal goals for the school year, discusses student progress and growth throughout the year and provides the families with resources based on particular need. Parents who are unable to attend the meeting are contacted via phone and a phone conference is held. Native language and interpretation is provided by bilingual staff during these individual meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. There are various events for our parents held throughout the school year. Some of these events include Parent/Teacher Conferences, College Night, Financial Aid Night, Scholarship workshops and personal growth workshops based on parent feedback and need. In addition to collaborating with staff members on holding specific workshops, the Parent Teacher Association President and Parent Coordinator also provides meetings which have workshops on specific ELL topics. These parent workshops are based on ELL academic/behavioral issues and how to support their ELL student through the use of native language. The events provide all parents, including ELL parents, the opportunity to meet teachers, counselors, and other staff members to become familiar with expectations and procedures. In order to accommodate the ELL parents, we provide native language interpretation and translation by bilingual staff members, including the Parent Association President and ELL Counselor/Coordinator. Parents are contacted both via phone messenger and mail in multiple languages to ensure that all parents are invited to participate in these various events. The Parent Coordinator, Anthonio Orridge, also reaches out to the parents directly to invite them to participate in activities, fundraisers and meetings throughout the school year. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. JKO has many partnerships with a myriad of corporations and community based organizations in our area and throughout the five boroughs. These partnerships not only work with the students but with the parents as well. They serve as both mentors for the students and have provided workshops for both students and parents. We believe that having such organizations work with the parents is key to increasing their knowledge and awareness of certain topics that pertain not only to one child's overall success but that of their own. We closely work with the following organizations: The Muse Hotel, Roundabout Theater Company, Big Brother-Big Sister of NYC , College Now Program w/City College of New York , Flamenco Vivo , National Academy Foundation , New York City Mentoring Program, Virtual Enterprises, International World Savvy, El Dia De Los Muertos (Mexican Day of the Dead) and Inwood House. Evaluating the needs of our parents is key to a successful learning environment. There are a number of ways in which we assess the parents concerns and issues. Meetings held throughout the school year will be used to continue to determine and assess the needs of the parents and students. This data will help the school determine what activities and programs to put in place for our school community. In addition to parents serving on the School Leadership Team (SLT), administration consults with the Parent Association to determine specific areas that need to be addressed. Throughout the school year, parents will receive various surveys. These surveys will be based on instructional programming, activities/clubs in the school, and the school learning environment. This is especially critical when creating or discontinuing services or programs offered at the school. We also evaluate the parent survey provided by the Department of Education to assess our parental needs. Meetings held for parents throughout the school year will have translation services provided by various school staff that speak their native language. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 71  2018-19 SCEP-FF 72 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Edward DeMeo, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 73  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis H.S School DBN: 02M529 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Edward DeMeo Title Principal Steve Athanasakis Assistant Principal Anthonio Orridge Parent Coordinator Maribel Nieves ENL/Bilingual Teacher Annette Austin Parent Maribel Nieves Teacher/Subject Area Hector Colon Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Nicole Vega School Counselor Mariso Rosales Leticia Milan Erika Gutzeit Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 74  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M529 School Name: Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Superintendent: VivanOrlen The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Athanasakis Steve AP PPS No yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Before the start of the academic year, the pupil personnel department retrieves the ATS UPPG data report indicating the preferred language parents would like to be contacted in. This report is utilized to send out specific documents and phone messages. At JKO, there are many events for our parents held. Some of these events include Freshmen Orientation, Parent/Teacher Conferences, College Night, Financial Aid Night, Scholarship workshops. During these various events, parents are asked to complete surveys, provided in their native language, updating their biographical information and informing the school of which language they would prefer to be contacted in. Staff members and the Parent Teacher Association President or Principal Designee also provides meetings which have workshops on specific topics. These parent workshops are based on academic/behavioral issues and how to support their student through the use of native language. The events provide all parents, including ELL parents, the opportunity to meet teachers, counselors, and other staff members to become familiar with expectations and procedures. In order to accommodate parents whose first language is not English, we provide native language interpretation and translation by bilingual staff members, including the Parent Association President or Principal Designee. Not only do we provide workshops and meetings with translational 2018-19 SCEP-FF 75  services, but any phone messages, emails and letters sent home to parents are written both in English and the home language of the student. This ensures that parents will receive specific information in a timely manner. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Chinese Bengali Arabic Filipino Russian French Vietnamese Mandinka Wolof Mandarin 309 240 10 12 5 1 2 1 1 2 1 0 American Sign Language 0 Moldavian Thai 0 1 52.82 41.03 1.71 2.05 .85 .17 .34 .17 .17 .34 .17 0 0 0 .17 304 242 8 12 6 1 2 1 1 2 1 1 1 2 1 51.97 41.37 1.37 2.05 1.03 .17 .34 .17 .17 .34 .17 .11 .17 .34 .17 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Principal Letters September-June Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Bilingual staff translates document at least a couple of weeks in advance 2018-19 SCEP-FF 76  before letters are sent to ensure appropriate translation. For language other than English and Spanish, staff contacts the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation services. Bilingual staff translates document at least a couple of weeks in advance before letters are sent to ensure appropriate translation. Entitlement Letters September/October For language other than English and Spanish, staff contacts the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation services. Bilingual staff translates document at least a couple of weeks in advance before letters are sent to ensure appropriate translation. Non-Entitlement Letters September/October For language other than English and Spanish, staff contacts the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation services. Bilingual staff translates document at least a couple of weeks in advance before letters are sent to ensure appropriate translation. Progress Reports September-June Monthly Newsletters September-June For language other than English and Spanish, staff contacts the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation services. Bilingual staff translates document at least a couple of weeks in advance before letters are sent to ensure appropriate translation. For language other than English and Spanish, staff contacts the DOE 2018-19 SCEP-FF 77  Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation services. Bilingual staff translates document at least a couple of weeks in advance before letters are sent to ensure appropriate translation. Notification Letters September-June For language other than English and Spanish, staff contacts the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation services. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Academic/Individual Student Meetings September-June Parent Workshops Dates of Workshops will vary throughout the school year provide interpretation service(s)? Parent communication with staff is provided both in English and Spanish, since they are the languages most preferred by the parents. However, if the parent speaks another language and we do not have a staff member to provide interpretation, the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be utilized. Bilingual staff members from JKO are available to assist and translate information to the parents regarding any information given by the school and/or staff. The bilingual staff member also translates the information given by the parents in the meetings to the school and/or specific staff member. Parent communication with staff is provided both in English and Spanish, since they are the languages most preferred by the parents. However, if the parent speaks another language and we do not have a staff member to provide interpretation, the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be utilized. Bilingual staff members from JKO are available to assist and translate information to the parents regarding 2018-19 SCEP-FF 78  New Student Orientation September-June Parent Teacher Conferences November, March and May College/Financial Aide Night November/December any information given by the school and/or staff. The bilingual staff member also translates the information given by the parents in the meetings to the school and/or specific staff member. Parent communication with staff is provided both in English and Spanish, since they are the languages most preferred by the parents. However, if the parent speaks another language and we do not have a staff member to provide interpretation, the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be utilized. Bilingual staff members from JKO are available to assist and translate information to the parents regarding any information given by the school and/or staff. The bilingual staff member also translates the information given by the parents in the meetings to the school and/or specific staff member. Parent communication with staff is provided both in English and Spanish, since they are the languages most preferred by the parents. However, if the parent speaks another language and we do not have a staff member to provide interpretation, the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be utilized. Bilingual staff members from JKO are available to assist and translate information to the parents regarding any information given by the school and/or staff. The bilingual staff member also translates the information given by the parents in the meetings to the school and/or specific staff member. Parent communication with staff is provided both in English and Spanish, since they are the languages most preferred by the parents. However, if the parent speaks another language and we do not have a staff member to provide interpretation, the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be utilized. Bilingual staff members from JKO 2018-19 SCEP-FF 79  are available to assist and translate information to the parents regarding any information given by the school and/or staff. The bilingual staff member also translates the information given by the parents in the meetings to the school and/or specific staff member. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, parents will be notified in English and their home languages via phone and email. Bilingual staff will be utilized in translating the message communicated to parents through phone calls and email. If we cannot provide translation through a staff member, we will utilize the language and Interpretation Unit as well as use translation tools to ensure accuracy. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During professional development meetings in the beginning and throughout the school year are reminded and told of rules and regulations regarding translation for parents. Staff is given information regarding specific staff members that are bilingual that they may utilize for translation of documents as well as during meetings throughout the year. They are also given information regarding the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) During the freshmen orientation or enrollment of any new student, parents are asked to complete a survey where they are asked to divulge their preferred language. This information is not only asked on the provided documents but during enrollment interviews by the Assistant Principal of Pupil Personnel Services (APPS) throughout the school year. This information is then transferred into the ATS UPPG function to be stored and utilized for future communication outreach. Any interpretation communication with parents at various points of the school year (Parent-Teacher conferences, Orientation, Parent workshops, Academic/Individual Meetings and College/Financial Aid Night) is provided by bilingual staff members. Parents are greeted with signs in various languages welcoming them into the school community as well as provided with documentation in their home languages. During this time parents are also reminded of their right to receive information in their home languages. There have been instances where parents 2018-19 SCEP-FF 80  have brought a friend or family member to interpret. In those specific cases, a bilingual staff member still will aide in the interpretation for both the parent and staff member. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Evaluating the needs of our parents is key to a successful learning environment. There are a number of ways in which we assess the parents’ concerns and issues. In addition to parents serving on the School Leadership Team (SLT), administration consults with the Parent Association to determine specific areas that need to be addressed. Throughout the school year, parents will receive various surveys. These surveys will be based on instructional programming, activities/clubs in the school, and the school learning environment. This is especially critical when creating or discontinuing services or programs offered at the school. We also evaluate the parent survey provided by the Department of Education to assess our parental needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 81 
