 02M542 School Name: MANHATTAN BRIDGES HIGH SCHOOL Principal: MIRZA SANCHEZ MEDINA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Manhattan Bridges High School 310200011542 9-12 School Number (DBN): 02M542 525 West 50 th Street NY, NY 10019 (212) 757-5274 646-557-3926 Fax: Email Address: glock@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: George Lock School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Mirza Sánchez-Medina Susan Lally Pedro Fermin Marangelitza Rivera SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: PersidoRodriguez Angel Obergh AriannaRivas NA District Information Geographical District: 2 Richard Cintron Superintendent: 335 Adams St Brooklyn Ny 11201 Rm 504 Superintendent’s Office Address: rcintro@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address:   Phone Number: (212) 356-7518 Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Richard Cintron Executive Director: 335 Adams St Brooklyn Ny 11201 Rm 504 rcintro@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (212) 356-7518 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Mirza Sánchez-Medina Susan Lally Pedro Fermin NA PersidoRodriguez Angel Obergh Diana Rodriguez TBD Marangelitza Rivera Andre Torres JannerysRosado Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Administration Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Arelys Olarte Nina Santiago YaniraMartinez Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission & Philosophy: Section 4: CEP Overview We provide access to academically challenging college preparatory coursework in Humanities and Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) to prepare all of our underserved Latino English Language Learners (ELLs) to meet the demands of the 21st century global economy. We focus on developing students’ skills in bilingual   academic language and communication, and career readiness. We empower students to appreciate and use their native cultures and language as a personal and professional asset. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our School: Manhattan Bridges High School opened its doors in September of 2003 as a transitional bilingual school for Spanish-speaking students. Our school has consistently received an “A” on the NYC Progress Report (PR) since 2007, when PR grades were initiated. In 2009 we opened a Dual Language program and National Academy Foundation (NAF) Academies of Engineering and Information Technology with National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering (NACME) and Project Lead the Way (PLTW) to support the curriculum. Strengths: ● Development of student character and academic skills ● Providing access to advanced coursework to all students no matter what their starting point ● Providing a safe learning environment with a supportive school culture where students positively contribute to the school community ● Supporting English Language Learners in achieving academic excellence ● Rich extra-curricular events and educational/team building field trips ● Multitude of external partners who support Youth Development and academics Accomplishments: ● Consistently ranked at the top of NYC’s Progress report (i.e. >90 th %ile) for over a decade ● Well-Developed in majority of QR indicators School Quality Guide indicates that school has exceeded targets in 4 year graduation rate and 4 year college readiness rate. School has met or exceeded all targets for Regents Performance.  Challenges: 0  There has been a downward trend in credit accumulation for 9th and 11th graders Due to retirements and other factors, there will be a turnover of approximately 6 teachers Survey indicates that a significant portion of students do not feel instruction is rigorous Observations indicate strategies to maximize engagement are not sufficient and PD for teachers on student engagement is needed overall Math Regents pass rates are low, and college readiness in math needs improvement Organization and systems need to be strengthened 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our Students: 529 students attend Manhattan Bridges High School where 48% are English Language Learners (ELLs) and the remainder is comprised of former ELLs. The specific needs of ELLs include the need to learn a new language at an accelerated pace and still pass all Regents as well attain college readiness. There are also SEL needs around settling into a new culture. All students participate in the federal free lunch program. 34 students have IEPs, where the majority of them fall under the disability category of LD (Learning Disabled, and range from performing in reading, writing, and math below grade level to needing speech services. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The areas in which our school made the most growth during previous year were: ● Rigorous Instruction – Common Core-aligned instructional units including reading of non-fiction, debates, application of critical thinking, and argumentative writing were implemented in all subject areas in some cases as interdisciplinary units. To meet student needs, instructional activities which develop student literacy were commonly employed in science, technology, engineering, and history (US), in addition to the ELA/ESL classroom. Social Studies teachers have done significant curriculum development where they incorporate TESOL strategies. Science teachers have adapted curriculum to include inquiry based activities and "5E" style lessons to align with NGSS. ● Supportive Environment – Students are taking a more active role in the process of learning both in and out of the classrooms. Teachers are moving towards more student centered instruction overall by giving students more opportunities to participate in academic discussion, support class routines, and reflect on learning for the day. Participation in internships, WBL, field trips, and other extracurricular activities was high. ● Collaborative Teachers – teachers report more frequent professional dialogue and collaboration with their colleagues. Administration and teachers worked together during PROSE meetings. The key areas in which our school will focus on for improvement include: ● Data goals: Improving pass rate on all Regents (except Living Environment), improving College Readiness Levels (75+/80+), especially in math Increasing student attendance Increasing post-secondary enrollment rate ● Rigorous instruction: increasing the quality of academic discussion in the classroom for the purpose of improving student engagement, raising rigor, and developing language proficiency and critical thinking skills 1  ● Collaborative Teachers – providing structured PD on DOK, student discussion, developing language proficiency and critical thinking skills, and increasing student engagement ● Family-Community Ties - Devising additional activities and events which build strong family-community ties, especially in helping families: navigate the college application process, connect high school performance to future careers, and informing parents of key aspects of the curriculum and what can be done at home to support children (i.e. important reading), harness resources provided by outside partnerships (requires further organizing team internally to take advantage of these opportunities) 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M542 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 517 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 1 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 15 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 83.0% % Attendance Rate 80.5% % Reduced Lunch 48.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 98.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.26 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 93% 87% 81.3% 39.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 7 2 2 16 90.4% 1.4% 4.3% 0.4% 0.2% 0.4% 4 26% 5.4 N/A N/A 96% 91% 95.1% 28% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A YES YES 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Assessment: Classroom observations indicate a need to increase the use of academic discussion to build critical thinking skills and increase student contributions College readiness data indicate that highest performing students need greater challenge while lower performing students need additional scaffolding and support. Math CCSS indicate need for deeper conceptual understanding of math; classroom observations indicate the need to increase the level of student intellectual engagement. Math classes are structured around a Regents prep model instead of contextualizing the math and making the experience authentic and meaningful Strengths Current instructional program provides excellent scaffolding for ELLs Current instructional program includes CCLS-aligned activities across all subjects and grades, with a strong focus on literacy Teacher demonstrate capacity for growth and adjustment in regard to meeting the needs of all learners Needs: More teacher teams to focus on the development of curriculum that includes rigorous and engaging learning activities More teacher teams to focus on pre-scripting questions along the full range of DOK as well as pedagogical strategies to engage all students in academic discussion. More teacher commitment to increasing student-centered discussion 4  Professional development on the use of questioning and discussion to increase the active processing of information and ideas by students Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all teachers will plan formative assessments which strongly engage newcomer ELLs (i.e. SIFE, entering and emerging ), no matter their current performance level, as measured by a 5% increase in credit accumulation. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Daily collaboration by departments and/or teacher teams to focus on creating authentic assessments Department Teams Biweekly grade-level meetings to enable interdisciplinary collaboration focused on adjusting curriculum to include a greater focus on deeper exploration of concepts and ideas along with proper scaffolding for ELLS Faculty September 2018 to January 2019 September 2018 to March 2019 Department Teams Grade Team Leaders Peer intervisitations to learn how different teachers provide instruction to target student language acquisition Faculty November 2018 - December 2019 Principal Assistant Principal In first observation cycle, supervisors review lesson plans and curriculum during team meetings and focus on teacher performance in Components 3c and 3d Faculty September 2018-December 2019 Principal Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. By early October, a curriculum night event will have taken place where parents can learn about the different strategies to support students at home. During Curriculum Night, parents will first go to the auditorium where they will have light refreshments, pick up their child's programs, and sit for a presentation by the principal and guidance 6  counselors during which time they cover topics such as the different diploma types (including the bilingual seal), the six Advanced Placement classes being offered , the Academies of Engineering, Information Technology, and Computer Science. After that the parents follow their child's schedule and meet each teacher. Each teacher does a 10 minute presentation about the course and outlines other important information for the teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for collaboration outside of school day Schedule adjustments to allow teacher time for collaboration and key team meetings Programming needs to include common periods for teacher teams Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Checkpoints include: -By December, the first instructional round will indicate that 75% of teachers are regularly planning formative assessments with clear criteria for learning as indicated in lesson plans and teacher artifacts. -Formative assessments will focus on deeper conceptual understanding and critical thinking skill (daily). For example, the teacher will review the level of rigor in the standards and include assessments which go above and beyond the standard. Curriculum should include debates, projects, research papers, and other forms of authentic learning activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Observations show increased student participation in academic discussion Teacher artifacts show planning for academic discussion and engagement Observation reports data College Readiness data 7  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Assessment: Credit accumulation decreases after first year, especially for third year (SQG 2015-16 indicated 94.0% for 9th graders, 86.0% for 10th, and 75.95% for 11th. For lowest third, credit accumulation goes from 86.8%, to 75.0%, to 51.4%, for 9th, 10th, and 11th graders respectively). Classroom observations indicate a strong focus on preparing students for Regents exams, especially in mathematics (Math teachers include real world applications in instruction in less than 10% of observations) Classroom observations indicate that strong engagement, robust assessment practices, and student voice are prevalent in some classrooms but not consistently across all subjects and grades Strengths: Teacher culture is committed to providing support to struggling students before and after school Teacher teams and structures are in place to support PD Students culture is positive and focused on attaining college readiness School environment is safe and students have adults who they can lean on for support Needs: -Greater socio-emotional supports for failing students -Appropriate teachers to lead after school support classes -PD for teachers on how to develop the socio-emotional health of children 9  -PD on teacher affect -Increased methods for engaging students, using student voice to promote ownership, and assessing students systematically such that they progress to mastering the standards Increased credit accumulation (less failure of coursework), especially in Freshmen and Sophomore years Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, 100% of teachers will implement socio-emotional learning (SEL) strategies to challenge and support all students as measured by an increase in credit accumulation by 5% each semester 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PD on socio-emotional learning (SEL) to teacher leaders lowest third September Principal APS C&I At biweekly grade team meetings, the teachers will identify those failing students and devise interventions to prevent failure of course Teachers September - June Grade Teams Guidance Weekly Guidance meetings to assess performance and provide supports as necessary (e.g. organize extended day activities to support struggling students through after school tutoring, small group instruction, and other coursework) Failing Students September - June Principal APS Guidance NA NA NA NA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. At the end of each marking period, the parents of any students who are failing multiple classes will come into the school to work out an individualized action plan. The plan will help students organize their time and efforts to achieve their academic goals while still fulfilling other responsibilities at home and after school (e.g. sports). Parent outreach will be done by parent coordinator. Guidance counselor will bring student records and template for action plan. Teachers, students, parents, and guidance will collaboratively construct action plan. 1  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session Funding for after school activities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, scholarship data for Freshmen and Sophomores will be at 85% or higher. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Credit accumulation Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: -Majority of teachers performed at effective and highly effective during the 2017-2018 school year, demonstrating sophisticated teaching methodologies. -Parents and students feel that school is culturally-inclusive within curriculum -Most teachers are willing to improve their teaching methodologies and are eager to try new ideas. Hence, teachers demonstrate dedication to student achievement and professional growth. Needs: -Framework for Great Schools report indicates need for better professional development and more chances for teachers to collaborate and be innovative -Greater alignment of teacher collaboration and professional development with school goals, and teacher and student needs -Greater sharing of best practices along with professional dialogue about classroom practice within and across subject areas Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher-led teams will develop a PD plan to improve College Readiness by 5%, credit accumulation for the lowest third of students in the second year by 5%, and the number of students testing out of NYSESLAT by their Junior year by 5%. 3  4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? C&I Team will meet and develop a PD Plan along with a calendar to best align teacher development with the needs of the students Faculty September-October C&I Team Principal and AP will identify teacher leaders to lead specific initiatives outlined in the PD Plan, such as SEL PD, and to monitor the efficacy of these initiatives Faculty Students October - January Principal Assistant Principal Teacher Leaders C&I Team will organize efforts to increase the Faculty's capacity to increase credit accumulation among students Faculty October - January C&I will organize intervisitations and other forms of professional collaborations to target the needs of teachers and students Faculty October - April C&I Team Students C&I Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. All teachers will submit a parent outreach log by November 15, 2018. Teachers as a group will increase their role in contacting parents of struggling students, meeting with them, and preparing an action plan to excel in the class. The AP of Operations will use Google docs to monitor parent outreach activities by checking teacher logs every 6 weeks. Teachers have a parent outreach period built into schedule as part of PROSE. The Dean will re-direct teachers to contact parents of misbehaving students. 5  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session Funds for professional textbooks Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administration will observe implementation of SEL activities in all (100%) subject areas by June 2019 Teacher leaders will turnkey important SEL PD during biweekly Grade Team meetings All teacher will observe or be observed by a colleague to stimulate professional dialogue Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYSESLAT, credit accumulation (STARS, New Visions Data Portal), and college readiness Regents data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  Principal has established a team of highly skilled pedagogues who work collaboratively to push for the success of the school  Opportunities for teacher growth are embedded into the normal functioning of the school  Strong supports for socio-emotional development are in place Needs:  A responsive team which can adapt school systems and structures and coordinate meaningful in-house PD to meet school vision/goals and meet the educational needs of the students (QR Indicators 3.1, 3.4 and 4.2)  A team of instructional leaders who can coordinate 9-12 curriculum adjustments which incorporates rigorous and engaging CCLS activities that promote critical thinking and language proficiency (QR Indicator 1.1)  A systematic analysis of teaching strategies and other Highly Effective (Danielson) practices related to high quality student work and a process for sharing these practices across school (Quality Indicator 1.2)  Analysis of programmatic course sequences to determine coherent progression from lower level classes into Honors and Advanced Placement courses, and how to scaffold instruction such that a maximum of students complete 4 years of math/science and reach 80++/80+ benchmark (Quality Indicator 1.3) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the principal and AP will meet with each subject team to review lesson plans and curricula to support teacher growth in order to drive student achievement as measured by an increase in Regents pass rates by 5%. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Develop the leadership capacity of the members of the C&I Team during weekly meetings C&I Team October-May Principal Assistant Principal Principal and Assistant Principal will meet with each team to review lesson plans and curricula with a focus on how to improve planning for academic discussion (3b) and intellectual engagement (3c) Faculty October - November C&I Team C&I Team leads biweekly meetings to strengthen leadership skills and promote distributive leadership among Faculty Faculty October - May C&I Team NA NA NA NA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During PA and SLT meetings, the principal will explain how she guides teacher practice to meet the needs of the students. Principal will emphasize that tutoring, Regent prep, homework help, credit accumulation, and Saturday school are all offered as a means to help students excel. Parent coordinator will work with APO to support parents in logging into Skedula. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 8  Per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the C&I team will coordinate interdisciplinary activities in all (100%) subject areas The C&I Team will conduct a mock School Quality Review February 2019 to assess school’s performance The C&I Team will present findings of mock QR to Faculty and collaborate to identify strategies to support the school by January 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Regents data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Assessment: School Environment Survey indicates rating of 79% for "Strong Family-Community Ties." In particular, there is a need to increase the parents' participation in school events, and to involve parents more in the educative process of their children Needs:  Build a positive school connection with families and parents that overcomes cultural and language barriers  Increase parents volunteer opportunities in the school and teacher training for effective parent outreach approaches.  Create a school calendar that increases student achievement and development and family involvement.  Expand the Parent Academy and Courses for parents after school. Strengths:  Parents are supportive of students and school initiatives.  High turn out at parent events.  Parent coordinator keeps parents updated on key information. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To increase parent participation in school events, classroom activities, and supporting learning as measured by an increase by 5% on pertinent questions on School Survey 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Share calendar with parents and do phone masters to involve parents more often in events throughout the year such as student presentations, shows, awards ceremonies, field trips, and Curriculum Night Parents Students September 2018 - November 2018 C&I Team January 2019 YD Team Leader Parents April 2019 YD Team Leader ESL Teacher Assistant Principal Make survey and drop box available in school front offices. Teachers To foster a spirit of inter-dependence and promote student achievement, teacher leaders will lead parent workshops about actions that parents can take to support students academically Create and implement google doc to track outreach to parents (measure # conferences/ contacts with teacher, ease of contact with teacher, satisfaction level with interaction). Consider immediate satisfaction survey when parents interact with teachers. Parents Students October 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Partnerships include iMentor, Turner Construction, ACE, and Repertorio Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1  Grade Team Meeting Time Per session where applicable Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 10% increase in the number of contacts between families/parents and teachers and the parent satisfaction level with parent/teacher interaction will be at least 80% as evidenced in a parent survey. By February 2019, the 20% of parents will be involved in at least one student-led individual conference as evidenced in a parent survey. By February 2019, 20% of parents will have attended at least 2 school-based events as evidenced in a parent survey and reports from schools. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Framework for Great Schools report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Regents Prep Tutoring Small Group Regents Prep Tutoring Regents Prep Regents Prep Small Group Tutoring Small Group Tutoring Small Group Tutoring Before, during, and after school day, Saturdays Before, during, and after school day, Saturdays Before, during, and after school day, Saturdays Before, during, and after school day, Saturdays Before, during, and after school day, Saturdays Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ELL Status Failure of ELA Regents Needs to pass Regents or score at 80+ Needs to pass Regents Needs to pass Regents Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Failing classes Projects Behind grade level in credit accumulation Writing Assignments Small Group Online Coursework 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Extended day, classroom resources, after school snacks, clothing, and counseling Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 5 in shelter; 4 in temporary living situation; 1 in hotel; 103 in doubled up; 5 in shelter; 4 in temporary living situation 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4 Extended day, classroom resources, after school snacks, clothing, and counseling 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teachers are recruited using the New Visions tools for hiring. We seek teachers who are licensed in the subject in addition to having bilingual or ESL certificates. Our model of PD is built into the typical school day ranging from weekly department team meetings, biweekly grade team meetings, expert supervision, peer observations, Math for America for 8 teachers, New Visions TESOL for 6 teachers, external PD as necessary, as well as a full library of pedagogical literature. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development is provided in CCLS, CRE, language development, and YD. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 6  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We are PROSE school where the PROSE team meets biweekly to collaboratively make higher leverage decisions. We have a Curriculum and Instruction team composed of department leaders who meet biweekly with the guidance and the administration to shape the instructional program of the school. Teachers use formative assessments daily to inform instruction. Supervisors and teacher leaders provide in-house PD to teachers during the school day (e.g. post-observation conferences and common planning time) 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5B Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal $325,029.00 0 $28,878.00 X X X 7  Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 $3,241,024.00 X X 5A, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 8   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Manhattan Bridges High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [Manhattan Bridges High School] will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 0  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: crash-course in English language, parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 1  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; conduct our annual team building field trip for the 9th grade where parent volunteers are invited to participate in the activities The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2  [Manhattan Bridges High School] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 3  ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 4  ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 5  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Manhattan Bridges High School students are ELLs or former ELLs. 73.9% of our students are entitled to ENL services; 50.9% are ELLs per the RLAT report, 18.6% of our students are SIFE as per RSFE. The 2018 RLAT data shows that that our ELLs are mostly in the expanding (33%) and transitioning proficiency categories (10.1%) Only 5 students are in the entering proficiency level, 6.8% in emerging and 17% of the school body is a former ELL students. 23% are commanding still entitled to ELL services. 26.8% of all ELL students have stalled for 2 years at at the same level of proficiency as rated by the 2018 NYSESLAT assessment. As a result these students who struggle need supplemental direct instruction in order to meet school, City, State and Federal credit accumulation, Regents, graduation and college and career readiness standards. Many of our students have below grade level Home Language literacy skills when they arrive to New York City, and our high school, with limited exposure to rigorous science and math education. In addition, the Regents examinations that are most valued as indicative of students college preparedness are given only in English, i.e.; Algebra 2, Geometry, Chemistry and Physics, so the need to accelerate our students' acquisition and development of English language skills is more urgent than ever. For these reasons, our students need additional time and smaller classes to be given the supplemental education they need to be competitive. ELLs, including SIFE, students stalled in making progress on the NYSESLAT, and Special Education students, are one target population for direct Academic Intervention Services, as supported by these funds. A second target population is students who are progressing well in achievement on the NYSESLAT, who would benefit from enrichment. We are targeting direct instruction to our SIFE/Stalled students, with anticipated SIFE funds. A third target population of ELLs are students who are progressing well in achievement on the NYSESLAT, who would benefit from enrichment; note, many of the SIFE/Stalled students can take advantage of enrichment programs, too, because they are taught by HLA and bilingually certified teachers. The intention is for all of our students to be prepared for college and careers by providing equitable access. The following programs of direct instruction will be provided to ENL students. Please see budget narrative for dates, times, number of sessions, schedule, and teachers. · Advanced Placement small class instruction before school for up to 25 students. We will offer the small class instruction for Advanced placement ELA. The sessions will be taught by a licensed&nbsp;teacher in academic area for 8.8 hours a week until&nbsp;the&nbsp;day of the exam. Minimum&nbsp;of 54 hours of instruction at $2,808 · Targeted ENL small instruction for 50 students who need additional opportunities to develop their&nbsp;writing. These students are enrolled in an after-school program and need additional support. Dually licensed (ELA&nbsp;and ESL) teachers with great expertise in helping ELLs&nbsp;accelerate academically will lead the classes in English. &nbsp;The students will meet for 3 hours on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 4:00-5:30&nbsp;from November-January for a total of 30 sessions. Cost: $4,512.6 · sessions of 3 hours each will support NLA and ELA proficiency; students will learn about their native cultural identity and explore Latin American and Spanish cultural themes. &nbsp;A licensed bilingual Spanish Arts teacher will coordinate these sessions&nbsp;for 65 11th and 12th A Repertorio Español theater class in a&nbsp;workshop format will meet&nbsp;for 8 8  Small group instruction&nbsp;to help students increase their achievement in all core Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information grade students, during the Saturday Academy from 9:00-12:00 from November-January; sessions will be taught primarily in Spanish. &nbsp;Cost: $1203.36 · subjects (ELA, Math, Science, History). &nbsp;20 students per group will receive instruction by a bilingual&nbsp;/ content certified teacher during the Saturday Academy to strengthen their ENL proficiency. During Saturday Academy there will be 9 sessions of 3.5 hours each from 9:00-12:30 to provide additional ENL support to these 12th graders. Cost: $7,897.05 · ensure they fall back on track for graduation. We will give additional support during the Saturday Academy (9:00-11:30)&nbsp;to strengthen their ENL proficiency by developing their academic English literacy and literature analysis. The session will be led by a dually licensed ELA&nbsp;and ESL&nbsp;teacher for 2.5 hours from March-June for a total of 12 sessions. Instruction will be mainly in English. &nbsp;Cost: $1,504.2&nbsp; Cohort V, 11 graders, who are in the school's bottom third need additional support to rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: All our school community works closely in delivering instruction to ELL students. When NYSED announced the new rules regarding the CLTE requirement for teachers and Leaders we saw a need of supporting teaching in completing this requirement. Teachers interested can resisted to take PD through the NYCDOE ASPDP program. Teachers will get reimbursed the course fee after completion of the course. Teachers can take courses aliened to meeting their language acquisition mandates of 50% of their CLTE hour requirements. ASPDP will be sharing their 2018-2019 calendar at the start of the academic year. Teachers can create their ASPDP account and enroll in a class. We will reimburse teachers that provide us with the appropriate documentation proving the completion of the program. Each course varies in length and are scheduled after school. The provider is the After School Professional Development Program from NYCDOE. Cost: $3,310.2 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities 9  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Rationale: Parents who learn English are at an advantage in the marketplace and serve as role models to their children. Parents will be notified of this class, in Spanish, by mail, by backpack, at SLT meetings, at PA meetings, Parent-Teacher conferences and by Phone Master. We have been success in offering English classes to parents during our Parents’ Academy. Description: - ESL Class for 25 Parents - 8 sessions in the fall and 10 sessions in the Spring - Class Dates: from 5:30 PM - 7:30 PM; on Thursdays - Teacher: Adolfo Calovini, Licensed ESL Teacher - Teacher Time: 4:45 PM - 7:45 PM - Duration: November - May In addition, we will continue to have workshops coordinated by the guidance team and the parent coordinator. In September we will administer a survey to the parents to determine the topics of the workshop. Cost: $3,310.2 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA NA NA Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other NA NA 0 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. TOTAL NA NA 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name Manhattan Bridges High School Borough Manhattan School Number 542 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mirza Sanchez-Medina Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Adolfo Calovini Teacher/Subject Area Silvia Jimenez/Math Teacher/Subject Area Ruben Sanchez/NLA Related-Service Provider Jannerys Rosado/SPED Superintendent Donald Conyers Assistant Principal George Lock Coach type here School Counselor Mirian Lucas Parent Adriana Lunes Parent Coordinator Gladys Garcia Field Support Center Staff Member Jamie Baez Other (Name and Title) Marangelitza Rivera/Assistant C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 4 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 12 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 515 2 Total number of ELLs 248 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 48.16%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL Lang. School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2003-04 2017-2018 2009-10 2017-2018 K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 25 100 12 44 10 22 94 15 52 11 20 43 17 43 12 10 11 27 82 181 183 123 130 Tot # 77 248 0 71 221 0 617 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We have developed a level-set exam in English, which we use in tandem with NYSESLAT scores, to determine ESL/ELA placement for students. Students are moved from TBE programs into DL programs, as they acquire more skills in English. By looking at our ELL program breakdown, one can see that the proportion of students who begin in the TBE program goes down as language and literacy proficiency rise between the 9th and 12th grades. The assessment from Reading Plus also helps us to determine student literacy. We have learned that a good number of our intermediate ELLs are reading at a 2nd to 3rd-grade reading level, so they need targeted intervention to be able to meet high school Common Core Standards and become college ready by the time of graduation. We are developing an inquiry to determine the efficacy of the Reading Plus intervention program to raise these students' literacy levels. 3  One of our CEP goals is to graduate students who are college ready. Language development and literacy are key to academic success, so we are sending teachers for Common Core Literacy PD with the New York City Department of Education and with our Network, New Visions for Public Schools. In addition, we have invited a New Visions literacy coach to work with an inter-disciplinary team of teachers to develop horizontal alignment using effective literacy strategies in STEM and Humanities classes. We have also used the data collected to develop a schoolwide language development plan that includes MEAL, STEAL and DEAL to support the writing process. We use translanguaging, as recommended by Dr. Garcia's research, which determines that people acquire additional language(s) by using their native language as a tool. We use the BL and DL guidelines fluidly and program students based on their progress and performance rather than strictly on the mandates of one program or the other. We have exceptional success with ELLs, as borne out by our being a Golden Seal US News & World Reports School, 2013-2015, our Where Are They Now College readiness and attendance statistics, and our well above average graduation and Regents performance rates for ELLs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We provide professional development that incorporates teaching language. Teachers develop language objectives for all lessons schoolwide. Teachers participate of DOE-sponsored PD and we have a cohort of content area teachers that are participating in a Multilingual Language Program; a collaboration between City College and New Visions for Public Schools. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We believe we are successful at meeting the needs of our ELLs compared to other schools in the City, State, and Nation. All are incoming students take an in-house baseline assessment that in addition to the Home Language Survey and Student interview permit up to schedule her/him in the correct ELA / ESL class. We also use the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, 8th Grade ELA, and ELA Regents. After we have a baseline for the student the teachers continue to evaluate student progress through their formative and summative assessments. As this an ongoing cycle, we then reassess each student to determine if she/he is able to move to an advanced or honors class or if he/she needs additional supports we also provide them. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Students achievement is assessed along the term to determine if additional supports are needed. If so, we provide additional time for all students. For example, at MBHS, all students receive a minimum of 360 minutes of ENL/ELA instruction a week. If more time is needed, we provide additional support by enrolling students in classes that have subject teachers who are also licensed in ESL. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Manhattan Bridges High School’s academic design has demonstrated success in working with all ELLs. This stems from the belief that all students are able to thrive academically provided a supportive environment for learning. In this model all educators teach students, scaffolding the processes needed to attain mastery. In addition, all other staff works together to support the socio-emotional development of the adolescent. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Students progress and develop English language proficiency consistently and well over their four years at Manhattan Bridges High School. This year we have a larger number of newcomer ELLs in the 9th grade. However, we noticed a larger number of continuing students are in the Transitioning ELLs category. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The information is used first to program the students into the correct supports needed. Following this, we discuss with each content department and specify accommodations, scaffolding and supports to reading and writing that ensure a continuous 4  language acquisition progression. Data is reviewed and used to determine the support needed for all ELLs including SIFE and long-term-ELLs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ENL is offered by levels. All students receive at least 360 minutes of instruction a week. b. TBE program. If applicable. All students classes are programmed departmentally by cohort, NYSESLAT scores to determine need for entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding. In addition, we honor teachers' recommended ESL instruction, or DL instruction and by math level. Otherwise, all other classes are programmed heterogeneously. c. DL program. If applicable. In the 11 & 12 grades DL class are programmed heterogenously with TBE students. In the 9 & 10, DL classes are also programmed heterougenously and by target language. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In the TBE program, ENL instruction is provided by ENL teachers or teachers dually certified in both ELA and ESL. Entering ELLs are programmed for 540 minutes of instruction, Emerging and Transitioning ELLs for 360 minutes of instruction and Expanding ELLs for 180 minutes. Former ELLs also receive ENL support. The advanced 12th graders have an ELA teacher who is currently studying in a program for ESL certification and they have at least one additional class with an ESL certified teacher: ESL through Art, ELA Regents preparation or SAT preparation. Home Language Arts is taught in grades 9-12, by licensed teachers. The curriculum is developed collaboratively. In the TBE program, the Humanities course is taught entirely in Spanish. All students take a Spanish Literature course in the eleventh grade and AP Spanish Language and Literature are 12th-grade elective courses. In addition, 8 content area teachers are pursuing their ESL license to provide a greater level of language scaffold for ELLs. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the DL program, students receive 50% of their instruction in each language. We are still determining how to deliver instruction most effectively to our students. At first, we scheduled the language division by content area. In some classes we moved to a unit-by-unit language model, in which a unit in English was followed by a unit in Spanish. The students found this to be very difficult and this was not particularly successful. Therefore, to maintain the even distribution of instructional language, we reverted to a content-based division of languages for math and science: ELA and Math classes with instruction predominantly in English and Humanities and Science class with instruction predominantly in Spanish. Transitional Bilingual Education. Within each content area class, we might have students with a variety of English proficiency levels. This makes meeting language requirements for all students a delicate act of differentiation. On the large scale, we have more students with a 5  beginning English level in the lower grades and so the content area classes tend towards a higher percentage of Spanish language instruction. The science department tends to use the “sandwich” model of opening and closing the class in English while giving the majority of instruction in Spanish in Living Environment and Earth Science. Chemistry and Physics are taught primarily in English, with Spanish "sandwich" support as necessary. As noted earlier, this must be differentiated as appropriate to the English proficiency levels of the students in each class. Broadly speaking, it is possible to generalize that there is a greater percentage of English language instruction in the content classes in the upper grades (US History, Chemistry, Government, etc) than in the lower grade content classes (Humanities, Living Environment, Algebra). It is important to note here that all teachers in the school receive extensive professional development in integrating facilitation of language acquisition and development, and literacy skills into their curriculum development and instruction. Most attended QTEL training provided by the NYCDOE Office of ELLs. Teachers develop curriculum to include delivery and assessment of discrete language skills in every lesson. Reading and writing across the curriculum are emphasized. All teachers serving our ELLs, besides the Home Language Arts teachers are certified in ENL or bilingual or are in the process of pursuing this certification. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Teachers use common rubrics and assessments for paragraphing, essay writing and vocabulary development. We administer the Spanish LAB to students to evaluate their native language skills. Every student also takes the Spanish Language Regents exam, too. Over 95% of our students also take the AP Spanish Language and/or AP Literature and Culture exams. On the former, they average a score of 3+ and on the latter, 4.0. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The Manhattan Bridges instructional approach is to integrate “translanguaging” academic English and native language literacy development into curriculum and instruction with differentiation based on student need. Each child is individually programmed each semester based on teacher and counselor recommendation, grounded in State and in-house assessments. We have found that no matter students’ “designation” as SIFE or LTELL, our program is tailored to individual student academic and YD needs, based on ongoing formative and summative assessments. We have SIFE and LTELL students attending AP classes, as well as before, during, after-school and Saturday Academy credit intervention, credit accumulation and/or Regents preparation classes and tutorials, along with non-designated students, based on their progress and achievement, not solely based on their designation: • Instruction in all curriculum areas in both English and Spanish as the BL and DL program models require • Explicit teaching of students’ bilingual academic vocabulary skills and study habits necessary for success in high school and college in all classes. We have a Tier 2 list of vocabulary words that are used throughout the school. • Differentiated standards-based ENL and ELA instruction based on ELLs’ proficiency level, SIFE and LTELL status as determined by the NYSESLAT and/or NYSITELL; e.g.; before-school, after-school, during school, and Saturday Academy classes, as well as team-taught content area classes with push-in ENL teacher support. • We use a “leveled-set” assessments in ENL to place students in classes based on their English language development needs. The majority of SIFE students were placed in Entering and Emerging ENL classes with smaller class size, when possible, and explicitly taught language functions and syntactic structures, content-area knowledge to accelerate these students’ learning and bring them up to speed with their peers. • Rigorous grade-level curriculum and content-area instruction in LEP/ELL programs, reflecting best practices aligned with Common Core Learning Standards. • Related assessments are aligned with Common Core Standards • Coursework and assessments challenge students to answer questions, orally and in writing, based on evidence from text, that plumb depths of knowledge in both English and Spanish. • Students are explicitly taught strategies such as how to annotate, use a bilingual dictionary, ask questions, clarify, comprehend, analyze and synthesize text so they can read primary sources, professional articles, works of literature and poetry in both English and Spanish. 6  • Integrating ENL strategies for instruction in all classes, which include the development of all four language modalities: listening, speaking, reading and writing in both English and Spanish. • ENL instruction using appropriate and current research-based strategies. • English language instruction through the content areas using ENL methods, such as scaffolding strategies so that both language and content acquisition is achieved. • Home language instruction and/or encouraging students to use native language as a tool to support English language acquisition whenever necessary. • Developing on-going formative assessments, such as “Si Yo Puedo,” in order to plan, modify and augment instruction. • Sourcing and designing standards-based instructional materials and technology for ENL and content areas, age / developmentally appropriate, culturally diverse, relevant and available to implement CCSS,e.g.; Reading Plus and iExcel for math. • Introducing culturally diverse and relevant authentic fiction and non-fiction texts, including primary source material and leveled reading materials in a variety of genres in both languages to support the curriculum. • Integrating technology incorporated into ENL and content-area instruction. • Holding out high expectations and providing high support by providing students with highly qualified ENL and Bilingual certified Content Area teachers • Providing students with teachers, who are highly qualified, many of whom are published authors, professionals in their fields, and Ph.D.’s, with the differentiated and individualized professional development necessary to support their designing Common Core aligned curriculum scaffolded for our Bilingual and Dual Language ELL, SIFE, LTELL and Former ELL population. • Collaborating and sharing curriculum development in weekly co-planning meetings and bi-monthly discipline team meetings. • Teachers share best practices by posting curriculum they have developed in Google Drive and present best practices in discipline team and faculty meetings. • Assessing each student’s skills when they enroll, so we can provide them with necessary supports and challenges. • Our teachers are trained to use a translanguaging approach to language development; teaching students to acquire language skills in two or more languages by using language as a tool for learning • Meeting ELL, LTELL, SIFE, DL and Former ELL students where they are in language and academic skills and knowledge development with individualized bilingual and dual language programs, so all students have access to highest level of content from their first day in high school and are moved through the continuum of English and Spanish language development. • Building in multiple opportunities for students to practice reading, writing, listening and speaking skills by providing both direct instruction and activities that call for students to analyze and apply learning as they work collaboratively and individually on word problems, projects, debates, oral presentations, dramas, essays and reports • Modeling academic language in ways students are expected to respond and participate in discussion, debate, presentations and various writing forms and genres, e.g.; persuasive, informational, analytical and creative expression • Using assessment tools such as Pupil-Path, and “Si Yo Puedo” to track and inform students of their progress in acquiring specific skills and knowledge, and to develop individualized goals for each student • Moving students through a clear progression of English and Spanish language and literacy development based on the results of their initial assessments and continuing assessments throughout their high school career to provide individualized, differentiated programs that support our continuum of students from those who struggle to meet grade-level standards to those who are prepared to meet the highest academic challenges with the intention to graduate high-functioning bilingual and bi-literate students who are college and career-ready • Our BL students progress from a program which is taught primarily in Spanish in 9th grade, while being introduced to academic English vocabulary in content areas, to a program, which is taught primarily in English, using the Spanish language as a tool, by senior year. They are initially programmed in classes geared specifically to their needs, but by Junior and Senior Year, they are integrated into classes with DL students to provide them with greater access to fluent speakers of English. As they progress in English they are also being prepared to take AP Spanish Language and/or AP Spanish Literature and Culture in their Junior and Senior years. • Our DL students progress from a program that is taught primarily in English, with a strong emphasis on development of Spanish language and literacy development with the expectation that they will take AP Spanish courses in their Junior and/or 7  Senior Years. • Providing differentiated ENL and HLA classes and programs for struggling students, on-track students and accelerated students, including during, before, after-school and in Saturday Academy. We do not track students, rather we meet their needs where they are and move them along a continuum of progress as we prepare them to excel: We can point to numerous students who came to us with extreme challenges in native and/or English language literacy, who graduated with Advanced Regents diplomas, college-ready with scores of 3 and above in three or more AP classes. • Valuing and following through on a Youth Development focus to meet adolescent immigrant and urban youths’ social and emotional needs • 2 counselors for 526 students • Providing career/work-based learning and college advisement built into CTE and College and Career Seminar curriculum • Communicating, informing and responding to parents’ concerns in a comprehensive and extensive manner to support their children’s academic success Curriculum and programming: • Seven AP courses; Spanish Language, Spanish Literature and Culture, English Language, Statistics, Environmental Science, Macroeconomics, Calculus and Computer Science • Four years of Math and Science • Four years of National Academy courses in Information Technology, four years of Engineering using the Project Lead the Way curriculum, and three years of computer science. • Four years of College and Career Seminar • Accelerated and Honors courses • Extensive After-school and Saturday Academy tutoring, credit accumulation, credit acceleration and Regents preparation classes to meet differentiated academic and socio-emotional needs of ELL, LTELL, and SIFE students • College Trips • College Now • Exploring; After-school career exploration programs in engineering, law enforcement, business, law and architecture • Community building grade team field trips to the Bronx Zoo, Chelsea Piers, Frost Valley Environment Center and Washington, D.C. • Incentives, recognition and rewards for excellent attendance and academics • After-school sports teams and clubs: • Spanish language theater • Music • Baseball • Soccer • Robotics • Dance • Career Day • Job Shadows and field trips to organizations such as American Express, ESPN, NBC, Ernst and Young, • iMentor; every 12-grade student is paired with an online mentor to work through a college and career awareness and advisement curriculum • Opportunity to publish books; so far a poetry book and a collection of college essays We focus significant time, resources and attention on youth development, college and career access and awareness and developing our students’ leadership skills. We implement a comprehensive advisory and attendance outreach program. SIFE students who attend MBHS regularly become virtually indistinguishable from mainstream students in terms of results by the time of graduation, except for SIFE students who entered in the middle of the 10th grade, who generally need additional time. Our partnerships with the National Academy Foundation, iMentor, Explorers, HISPA and Juniper provide students with financial awareness and work-based learning opportunities. All of our students participate in two Career Days a year. Over one hundred and fifty Manhattan Bridges students participate in job-shadowing and/or internship opportunities with such 8  organizations as Verizon, Juniper, Ogilvy and Mather, ESPN, and Cornell University Hydroponics Laboratory. We also focus significant attention on educating our new immigrant parents to Manhattan Bridges High School, and New York City and State educational standards. We invite parents to learn more about the school’s efforts on their children’s behalf and determine strategies with them to support their children’s bilingual, bicultural, academic, social and emotional development. Our experience is that this multifaceted, multidisciplinary approach provides our students and their families with the emotional and academic support and encouragement they need to persist, grow and achieve success. We program individually, based on annual results, not ELL designation. Students who have remained at the Intermediate levels for years in middle school quickly advance to expanding and commanding levels at Manhattan Bridges. Students who come to us as long-term ELLs, or become LTELLs while usually have significant learning, attendance, social and emotional problems that need addressing with individualized interventions, which we address through individualized programming by offering before and after school tutoring, interventions, and Saturday Academy. SIFE students, newcomer ELLs and long-term ELLs take bilingual classes and ESL classes along with all other students in the school. Some students who are not identified as SIFE have similar literacy profiles to SIFE and others who were identified as SIFE in their younger years may not appear to be lagging so significantly in comparison to their classmates. Depending on student need, interventions may include placement in specific groups of Humanities or Spanish writing courses and/or support classes, ENL/ELA classes and/or extended day programming to address Spanish and/or English decoding, phonics, vocabulary development and reading comprehension. We have learned that providing instruction in Spanish does cross over to improved results in struggling student reading and writing in English. Teachers continue to develop ways differentiate and layer instruction in a variety of ways to ensure that content can be accessed by all students regardless of their language or literacy skills, by providing differentiated materials and resources, using videos, images, music, drama, and realia. They provide differentiated activities that allow students to present their learning visually, orally, dramatically and/or in writing. They scaffold instruction for those who need it and remove scaffolds for those who don't. We have found that teaching all students to use the MEAL (Main Idea, Evidence, Analysis, Linkage) template for writing paragraphs developed at Duke University has improved writing results on the Regents exams We have determined that our SIFE and long term ELL students' results are virtually indistinguishable from our other students' in terms of Regents pass rates and graduation rates by the time they reach their senior year. This is because of the great attention to data and individualized approach we take to instructing of our students. By the first marking period, students who are struggling are identified for intervention services and programmed for tutoring, credit recovery or Regents prep as necessary. We also provide additional support in English grammar, ELA Regents preparation and SAT preparation both during the regular school day and in extended day programs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All of our SWDs attend mainstream CTT classes. They are supported by a Special Educator, who works with their teacher and with them to make accommodations in materials, resources, and activities. These students are provided additional time, modified/differentiated readings, and testing accommodations as appropriate. The Special Educator works with students more intensively, as necessary to ensure that these students are provided with the supports they need, such as additional scaffolding, graphic organizers, vocabulary development, translations, hi-lo readers, visuals, manipulative, video, as appropriate to their needs, to access equitable and rigorous education. We have found, as in the case with SIFE, newcomer and long-term ELL students, that attention to data informs how to design instruction, find and develop resources and scaffold supports for our ELL-SWD students. Our teachers are, in essence, data specialists and curriculum developers who integrate language development into their instruction. We tailor-make programs for each student depending on their needs. We definitely put our 9  SWD into the least restrictive environment possible, CTT classes, and provide individual support, as necessary. All but one of our SWD students have graduated with Regents diplomas in the past five years. The majority graduate in four years. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In addition to the what is mentioned above, many of our students have undiagnosed learning issues. Labels mean significantly less than the latest brain research on "Mindset," - Carol Dweck - about the plasticity of the human mind. Students who have not YET met standards will, given sufficient time and support through scaffolding, repetition, re-teaching, reinforcement, respect and care. All the academic supports in the world will not take hold until students believe the adults who are entrusted with teaching them care about their success in school and life. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All students, both the most challenged and the most skilled need intervention. We consider all we do programmatically for students as preventive measures. Intervention is woven into every aspect of curriculum, programming, extra-curricular offerings and the CTE programs we offer in IT and Engineering. • Each student is programmed individually based on: o Progress towards graduation and credit accumulation o Regents scores o NYSESLAT scores o Results on in-house intake assessment exams in Spanish, Math, and Science o Results on in-house Leveled-Set assessments of English o Teacher and guidance recommendations o Need for intervention and support o Need for academic challenge • Transitional Bilingual Education program, offering high quality translanguaging instruction in HLA, ENL, ELA and content area instruction in both English and the native language. • Bilingual/translanguaging content level instruction in both English and the native language consistent with CR Part 154, i.e.; students are programmed for the mandated number units of instruction in ENL, HLA and ELA. Entering rand emerging ELLs receive the minimum of 540 minutes of ENL/ELA requirements for CR Part 154, and 216 minutes of NLA • Transitioning, Expanding, Commanding ELLs in DL receive the minimum of 360 minutes of ENL/ELA requirements for CR Part 154, and 216 minutes of HLA instruction. • Teacher schedules in TBE support the required units of study and language instruction for identified and participating students as applicable. • A Dual Language program that provides “translanguaging” in ELA, Spanish and content area instruction, taught by teachers with certification in Spanish, ENL and Bilingual education, consistent with CR Part 154 minimum requirements. • All students are supported in excelling in English language proficiency, as assessed by the ELA Regents and in-house Common Core activities and assessments. o All EPs have had a history of passing the ELA Regents, with well over 50% reaching college-readiness scores of 75+ • All ELLs, and Proficient DL students prepare for and are assessed by the Spanish Regents and/or AP Spanish and AP Literature exams. • Students enroll in either our NAF Engineering or Information Technology Academies, which culminate with industry certification. • An accelerated math program is offered to advanced math students. • Students are eligible to take AP courses and exams; AP Spanish Language, AP Spanish Literature, AP Economics, AP Statistics and/or AP Calculus; AP Environmental Science; and, AP Computer Science. • Students are able to have at least one Work-Based Learning experience. • Students in the 12th grade are assigned an online “iMentor” with whom they correspond and meet for youth development support throughout their career at MBHS and in college. 0  • Students take Seminar classes all four years, culminating in a College and Career Readiness Portfolio, which documents their Work-Based Learning activities, such as their resume, records of their participation in Job Shadowing and Internships, their college applications, and post-graduation plans. ELLs with disabilities, with interrupted formal education, and gifted and talented ELLs all receive the following: • ELLs with disabilities are provided with the same quality instruction that meets the requirements of Title I, Title II and CR Part 154 and their IEPs, appropriate to their age, native language proficiency, and literacy levels, as all MBHS students. • SIFE students are provided with the same quality instruction that meets the requirements of Title I, Title II and CR Part 154, appropriate to their age, native language proficiency, and literacy levels, as all MBHS students. • Gifted and talented ELLs, including SIFE and those with disabilities, are provided with the same quality instruction that meets the requirements of Title I, Title II and CR Part 154, appropriate to their age, native language proficiency, and literacy levels, as all MBHS students.Paste response to question here: 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Continuing the coaching from New Visions for Public Schools on implementing Common Core curriculum in Global History and chemistry. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are able to participate in all programs, including career academies, College Now, AP courses, 4-years of science and math. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. -Smart boards in every classroom. 11 rolling computer labs. 2 STEM Labs. 4 computer lab rooms. Freestanding computer and printing stations in hallway and students lounge, so students can print their work. -Reading Plus -Textbooks and trade books in English and Spanish -Science Lab resources provided by Lab Specialist -Brain Pop in English and Spanish -Bilingual online resources 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? -Through programming students to be in courses delivered either primarily in English or Spanish as dictated by State mandates. -Use of bilingual materials and resources -Translanguaging; using native language to support second language acquisition 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students are offered the same content, and more, as in any comprehensive high school. All students take four years of math and science, in addition to basic State and City requirements. All are offered the opportunity to take AP and College Now classes, internships and summer college programs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? -Smartboards in every classroom. 11 rolling computer labs. 2 STEM Labs. 4 computer lab rooms. Freestanding computer and printing stations in hallway and students lounge, so students can print their work. -Reading Plus -Textbooks and trade books in English and Spanish -Science Lab resources provided by Lab Specialist 1  -Brain Pop in English and Spanish -Bilingual online resources 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). -All 9th grade students are invited to a 2-week Bridge program to orient them to Manhattan Bridges. -New ELLs who enroll throughout the year are supported by peer mentors and by their guidance counselors. - All students belong to an advisory group (College and Career Seminar) 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? None, at the moment, mainly because of lack of time in their programs, which include CR-Part 154 mandates, CTE coursework, College Now and AP courses. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. Model of DL. Time in Target Language - Approximately half of the instructional time is spent in each language. ELL and EP students are separated in ELA classes and integrated in all other classes. DL is mainly self-contained in the 9 th grade, gradually integrated beginning in the 10 th grade and fully integrated by the 11 th grade. b. Language is primarily separated by content and teacher. For example, Global Studies is taught in Spanish, while Technology and Engineering courses are taught in English c. 9&10 Spanish in History and NLA/FL. The rest of core classes are taught in English with a gradual integration of Spanish. d. Both languages are taught at the same time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? As a largely TBE school, our professional development has always focused on our ELLs' improving literacy in both languages. This year we continue to have a school wide focus on preparing ELL students for college and careers by developing students' academic reading and essay-writing, and critical-thinking skills. We are focusing efforts specifically on early interventions for students who are failing classes; aligning the coherence of the teaching of reading and writing skills in ENL, ELA, Spanish HLA, Science and Social Studies; improvement of teacher questioning techniques, implementing a differentiated, skills-based science curriculum and developing curriculum aligned to Core Standards. We are providing specific, differentiated PD on areas included in our CR Part 154. See below: Vocabulary development in all classes Argumentative Essay writing Read aloud and shared reading Student accountability for learning from fellow students’ oral presentations; e.g.; note-taking, quizzes 2  Practice of asking students to reflect on what fellow students have shared aloud Cornell Note-taking practices promoted school-wide in College and Career Seminar Using Depth of Knowledge question stems to annotate text Turn and talk Peer interviews Debates in all subject areas Oral presentation projects QTEL strategies used to scaffold teaching of reading Free-writing and journaling Spiraling curriculum to promote student development of literary genre writing activities aligned to CC ELA standards Scaffolded, intentional teaching of writing skills such as developing a controlling idea, using transitions. Direct instruction, opportunity for practice and provision of clear feedback on student structuring of sentences, paragraphs, narrative essays, responses to literature Study of language conventions and grammatical structures -New Visions for Public School and New York City DOE professional development and coaching on Common Core alignment -Coaching from assistant principals and principal -Content area team meetings to share best practices -Interdisciplinary team meetings to share best practices -Peer teacher coaching during professional periods -Inter-visitations -Faculty workshops on sharing of best practices aligned to Common Core 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As aforementioned, we provide a number of support opportunity to all of our students. For instance, - Summer Bridge Program is taught by staff provided with curriculum from Project Lead the Way - iMentor who will work with student throughout four years of high school; - iMentor provides training to teachers - High School to college workshops - Over 60 students participate in College Now per school year - AP courses; AP teachers provided with AP Summer PD - College advisement program - Weekly College and Career Seminars; teachers provided with PD and material support from NAF and iMentor - Assistance in filling out college, financial aid and scholarship applications; College counselor meets with teachers and students during College and Career Seminar classes Intership program; Work-Based Learning Coordinator works with teachers to insure students are aware of and placed in internships Not only are all our PD sessions and faculty meetings aimed at better serving ELLs, but also there are a number of experienced ENL specialists on staff who act as resources for their colleagues in the unending challenge of getting our students to excel. Teachers meet in Faculty Meetings, Professional Teams, Content Area Teams, and/or Inter-disciplinary teams a minimum of four hours a month, in which at least one certified ENL and/or bilingual teacher or administrator is present and contributing, so teacher more than meet the required hour mandate. Records of attendance and minutes are taken at these minutes. Specific topics addressed are included in the PD Plan; See answer to #1 for specifics. 3  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parental involvement of ELL parents is high at MBHS, because all meetings are conducted in Spanish and English. Workshops offered to parents include ENL classes, technology classes and cultural events such as theatre and concert trips, arts and crafts activities (jewelery making) and workshops on citizenship and admissions and financial aid procedures for college. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Over half of the parents attend Parent-teacher conferences. About 50 attend PA meetings. Parents are informed of meetings and school events via monthly calendars, Phone master messages, and individual calls. We have an open-door policy. Parents know that they are welcome to come to school to speak with any staff member. Parents attend the monthly workshops prepared by the parent Coordinator o guidance team. Parents also attend SLT, and Title I meetings. The school also has the goal to have 100% of the parents use the Pupil Path App in order to monitor their child's progress. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Mirza Sanchez Medina, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Manhattan Bridges High School School DBN: 02m542 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Mirza Sanchez-Medina Principal George Lock Assistant Principal Gladys Garcia Parent Coordinator Adolfo Calovini ENL/Bilingual Teacher Adriana Lemus Parent Silvia Jimenez/Math Teacher/Subject Area Ruben Sanchez/NLA Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Mirian Lucas School Counselor Donald Conyers Jamie Baez Marangelitza Rivera Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Assistant Principal Other Other Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/27/2017 10/27/2017 10/27/2017 10/27/2017 10/27/2017 10/27/2017 10/27/2017 10/27/2017 10/27/2017 10/27/2017 8/31/17 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M542 School Name: Manhattan Bridges High School Superintendent: Donald Conyers The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No George Lock Marangelitza Rivera AP APIA No No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our school population is mainly ELL. All families complete the HLIS. All material sent home is in English and Spanish. In addition, all meetings with the families are conducted in the language of their preference. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English English 5% English 5% 7  Spanish Spanish Spanish Spanish Spanish Spanish 95% 95% 95% Spanish Spanish Spanish 95% 95% 95% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families All documents are sent in English and Spanish. -Attendance And Guidance Letters to parents - ongoing - Monthly Aug-June Course information - beginning of term Sept -Calendars - monthly -Parents' Handbook - beginning of the school year -Announcements of meetings - monthly -Info After-school Programs - by term Ongoing Sept-June Ongoing Sept-June Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We interpret and translate documents in-house with bilingual staff. During the summer our parent coordinator supports with translations. We interpret and translate documents in-house with bilingual staff We interpret and translate documents in-house with bilingual staff We interpret and translate documents in-house with bilingual staff 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 8  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide We have an open door policy, so parents are welcome to come to the school as open as they need. - SLT meetings -Parent Teacher Conferences - Attendance Meetings - Guidance Meetings - College Info Meetings - Family Night -Title I Monthly meetings Sept-June Sept - PA meetings attended also by staff Sept-June - Parents' Academy -ESL Classes for Parents Parents' Academy Oct-April interpretation service(s)? We interpret and translate documents in-house with bilingual staff. Our parent coordinator, and all our support staff are bilingual. Both counselors are bilingual. We interpret and translate documents in-house with bilingual staff We interpret and translate documents in-house with bilingual staff We interpret and translate documents in-house with bilingual staff 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. All written communication is done in English and Spanish. All oral communication is done in the parents' preferred language. All staff is bilingual. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The first 2 days of the academic year we review regulations and remind them that if needed they can contact the Unit, email Translations@schools.nyc.gov or call (718) 752-7373. Staff is aware that all communication with families must be provided in the preferred language of the family. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 9  All meetings and materials distributed to families are bilingual. All written notifications created by school staff are revised by Marangelitza Rivera and the principal to ensure the message is correctly translated. We use for reference the notification documents from the Unit as found on the intranet. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? -Parent Survey -SLT meetings -PA Meetings -Guidance Meetings -PA Executive Board meetings with the Principal -Any meeting with the Special Education teacher 0 
