 02M546 School Name: ACADEMY FOR SOFTWARE ENGINEERING Principal: SHAWN RAEKE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Academy for Software Engineering 02M546 School Number (DBN): 310200011546 9 – 12 40 Irving Place, New York, NY 10003 212-253-3299 Phone Number: 212-253-3289 Fax: Shawn Raeke sraeke@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Shawn Raeke John Bernor Judy Inosanto Alex Satin Frederique Henriot Alex Satin Jordan Mejia Mai-Len Kennedy - iMentor CBO Representative: District Information 02M546 Richard Cintron Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Room504 rcintro@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 923-5124 Phone Number: (718) 923-5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Affinity Group FSC Alexandra Anormaliza FSC: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Room 606, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Shawn Raeke John Bernor Judy Inosanto Ashley Cameron Pamela Ayala Alex Satin Jordan Mejia Mai-Len Kennedy Joanne Satin AriadnePrior-Grosch Mitch Williams *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member / Parent Member / Teacher Member / Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Staff Member Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Prepare every AFSE student to exceed the NYSED/NYCDOE graduation requirements and academic performance expectations in order to graduate high school with 21st century credentials (competencies, skills, knowledge, and readiness) that lead to the opportunity for successful entry into college and career. AFSE graduates are tomorrow’s inquisitive problem-solvers, collaborative leaders, innovative entrepreneurs, and critically-informed citizens. They have the voice to be heard, the visibility to be seen, and the value to feel relevant in preparation for having an influential role in this world.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Academy for Software Engineering (AFSE) is a Career and Technical Education high school that offers four years of computer science coursework embedded in a college and career preparatory curriculum. This combination of rich academics and hands-on professional exposure is the "AFSE experience" which prepares every one of our students to become tomorrow’s inquisitive problem-solvers, collaborative leaders, and innovative entrepreneurs. The "AFSE experience" for students includes the following special initiatives and key partners:  Mastery-Based Learning (Mastery Collaborative) Students "master" designated key skills and content for each course with learning outcomes to include the application of knowledge along with the development of important skills and dispositions. The Mastery Collaborative is a community for NYC public middle and high schools that use mastery/competency-based approaches to assessment, teaching, and learning. It is a program of the Model Redesign team in the NYC DOE's Office of Post-secondary Readiness.  Mentorships (iMentor) Students starting in 10th grade are paired with a professional mentor for their high school career in order to build meaningful relationships and to prepare for college matriculation. Students participate in a weekly college-prep curriculum while interacting both electronically and in person with their mentor. iMentor partners with high schools in low-income communities and matches every student with a college-educated mentor to prepare students for college enrollment and graduation.  College Initiative (OneGoal) All students participate in AFSE's College Initiative program which focuses on college campus exposure, the college application process including financial aid, and SAT preparation. Additionally, a small cohort of 32 students in each 11th grade class is selected to participate in OneGoal, which is a 3-year program (2 in high school and 1 in college), to increase college options, review application and enrollment processes, and establish academic, financial and social foundations.  CollegeNow (Baruch College) Students starting at the end of their 10th grade and who meet the college readiness indicator score on the ELA and Math Regents can participate in CollegeNow courses offered at Baruch College to earn college credit. CollegeNow is CUNY's largest collaborative program with the NYC DOE to help students meet high school graduation requirements and prepare for success in college, both academically and socially.  Work-Based Learning (CSNYC) Students are exposed to technology companies, job fairs, and events in order to learn more about the computer science and software engineering industry. The goal is to have students learn from industry professionals and to see first hand the possible careers available. CSNYC provides access to a high-quality computer science education to develop the knowledge and skills needed to realize student potential in pursuit of higher education and career.  Restorative Justice & Social-Emotional Education Students participate in an advisory program in grades 9 - 12. Advisory is an opportunity for students to set individual academic goals with the guidance of an advisor, learn about college and career options, and to participate in a small community focused on development of social-emotional learning through participation in restorative practices, including community building circles that provide a forum for student voice and increased awareness and sensitivity for diverse perspectives.  Peer Group Connection (PGC) The program is designed to provide peer mentoring to students in 9th grade. A group of students in 11th grade will be trained in facilitation techniques, including circle keeping, in order to turnkey activities in 9th grade advisory. The program will equip students with communication and leadership skills, as well as build investment in maintaining a positive school culture. 0  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Populations:  Minority Males (80%) - With an abundance of young men there is focus on various social/emotional activities to ensure that male students feel connected to school and their academics. Advisory and activities including the PSAL and partnership with the YMCA are used to motivate the male students through physical activity and incentives to transfer their energies into classroom coursework.   Females (20%) - The female population is small but dynamic. Female-only advisories have been created to ensure female students have opportunities to develop close bonds with each other and to discuss issues that may affect their performance and connection to the school. A group of female students form a Girls Group that is facilitated by social work to provide opportunity for female students to explore relevant issues. Additionally, in order to ensure that students feel welcomed into the community, a Girls Welcome event is held each spring that includes current female students and staff. Special Education (23%) - The SPED population is diverse and includes a range of special needs and accommodations. There are 8 SPED teachers who provide ICT and SETSS services including additional academic support before and after school. Additional services include speech, occupational therapy, and counseling through social work. Resources such as assistive technology and paras are widely used to support SPED students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. AFSE made significant progress this past school year in three areas in the Framework for Great Schools: 1. Effective School Leadership The school introduced important structures for distributed leadership. First, an academy structure was introduced that divided the school by grade band (9/10 & 11/2). Each academy was supported by an Academy Lead, each of whom had been established as model teachers and aspiring school leaders. Administration was also able to narrow the scope of oversight by assigning each academy (Upper & Lower) to an administrator who worked in concert with the Academy Lead. The administrators worked in collaboration with the business manager to form a cabinet that set school priorities and allocated resources based on schoolwide goals. 2. Collaborative Teachers An Instructional Leadership Team (ILT) was introduced comprised by two administrators and each Academy Lead. Through input from staff it was determined that the ILT would benefit from implementation of "open seat" meetings in which staff interested in topics included on the agenda could participate. This structure increased staff engagement and collaboration on important school issues. Two Focus Groups were established, one to address issues of improving our assessment of habits for success, as well as methods for improving communication and efficiency. At the final Chancellor Day, the staff broke into teams by interest to engage in providing feedback on schoolwide initiatives. 3. Rigorous Instruction This year the school rolled out Mastery Based Grading schoolwide. The development of assessments aligned to curriculum increased the overall challenge and rigor across classrooms. Students were prompted to engage in self-assessment to determine the next step of improvement based on the established performance criteria. The professional development for teachers focused on development and improvement of assessment and feedback practices to sustain high expectations with high support. 1  AFSE will focus on this upcoming school year in three areas aligned to the Framework for Great Schools: 1. Supportive Environment We made marginal improvement in this area but continue to prioritize personalizing the educational experience through important schoolwide structures such as advisory. The majority of students continue to not feel that teachers are able to determine if they are upset. We have addressed this concern by establishing a schoolwide expectation that each teacher is positioned at the door to greet students upon entry. Also, we will be introducing the Peer Group Connection program to build ownership of school culture in the student body. 2. Trust Although our Trust metrics remain above average, the overall metric went down from 2016-2017. We will continue to build trust through school structures that bring multiple stakeholders into the decision making process, including "open seat" meetings. For 2018-2019, it has been proposed to establish a decision making body that provides input on professional development to ensure that there is diverse input on the direction and goals of professional learning. 3. Strong Family & Community Ties Although our overall metric remains above average, the number went down slightly from 2016-2017. This year we introduced parent engagement structures such as Breakfast with the Principal, and continued structures such as the Genius Speaker Series, to increase the number of parents participating in the school. We must continue to build in workshops that permit parent participation as an alternative to passive absorption of information, as well as parent-led workshops (i.e., Upper Academy parents provide guidance to Lower Academy parents). 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M546 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 460 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 1 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 39 22 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 69.0% % Attendance Rate 61.3% % Reduced Lunch 4.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 55.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 10.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.01 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 88% 71% 83.3% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 72 63 4 89.8% 7.6% 25.4% 22.8% 7.6% 3.9% 4 26% 3.8 N/A N/A 92% 76% N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. AFSE is entering the fifth year of its mastery-based learning system in partnership with the NYCDOE Mastery Collaborative. The school aligns curriculum and instruction with a mastery approach in order to ensure equity and tailored access to rigorous college and career preparatory education for all students. AFSE is entering its second year of implementation of school wide mastery-based grading system, with the goal of providing transparent expectations and feedback to drive academic growth and mastery for students grades 9-12. 1. School’s strengths relative to Rigorous Instruction: College readiness in ELA and Math: By the end of the 17-18 school year, the percent of each cohort having earned a college ready score on the CC ELA Regents exam was: 79% (2018 cohort); 54% (2019 cohort). The percent of each cohort having earned a college ready score on the CC Algebra or CC Geometry Regents was: 74% (2018 cohort), 76% (2019 cohort), 83% (2020 cohort), 56% (2021 cohort). college enrollment: 99% of the 2018 cohort enrolled in college for Fall 2018. Advanced Math and Science Regents: The school made gains in June 2018 pass rates on the CC Geometry, CC Algebra 2, and Chemistry Regents compared to the 2016-2017 school year. The majority of our sophomores sat for the CC Geometry Regents with an overall 49% June pass rate as the outcome. A small group of students sat for CC Algebra 2 and Chemistry Regents with the following June pass rates: 66% (CC Algebra 2) and 48% (Chemistry). Overall increase in framework element score in School Survey: The Multi-Year Summary of our 2017-2018 School Quality Guide shows an overall increase in positive responses on the School Survey related to Rigorous Instruction from 3.60 in 2016-2017 to 3.91 in 2017-2018. 4  Quality Review indicators aligned with Rigorous Instruction: In our 2018 Quality Review, we were rated as Well Developed in Curriculum (1.1) and High Expectations (3.4), compared to Proficient ratings in both indicators in our 2015 Quality Review. 2. School’s priority needs relative to Rigorous Instruction: Credit accumulation: In the 2017-2018 school year, credit accumulation increased by 2% for students in first year, declined by 2% for students in second year, and declined by 1% for students in 3rd year. Global TRANSITION Regents: The June 2018 pass rate for the Global History Transition Regents was 61%, Student perceptions per School Survey: Per the 2017-2018 School Survey, student responses highlighted the following areas of need: 55% of students responded that they feel challenged (Q5a) and 51% of students indicated that their teachers ask difficult questions (Q5c). quality review indicators aligned with rigorous Instruction: Our Area of Focus in the 2018 Quality Review was Pedaogy (1.2), in which we received a Proficient rating. Credit accumulation is the highest leverage area for our school to address aligned with Rigorous Instruction. Students’ course mastery and ultimate credit accumulation will be indicators of their access to and proficiency in academic skills aligned with standards, Regents and AP Exams, and college readiness indicators. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 89% of 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th grade cohorts will earn 10+ credits by the end of June 2019 as indicated on STARS graduation analysis report. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development to leverage JumpRope gradebook analysis features to identify skill targets for various student groups (including ELLs, SWDs, gifted and talented). Participation in AP 4 All as campus collaboration including opportunities for teachers to access College Board training and inter-collaboration between schools. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 9th - 12th 9/6/18 - 10/25/19 Assistant Principals Academy Leads Monitor gradebook and monitor skill mastery data biweekly to examine student progress and interventions. 9th - 12th 9/6/18 - 6/25/19 Principal Assistant Principals Guidance Team Academy Leads Teachers Principal Assistant Principals Academy Leads Assistant Principals Department Leads Assistant Principals Teachers Assistant Principals District-Charter Collaborative Team Instructional Leadership Team (ILT): Weekly meetings that address instructional priorities. Bi-weekly open seat meetings are held in which interested staff are able to attend to contribute to the instructional core. 9th - 12th 9/6/18 - 6/25/19 Biweekly department meetings to align mastery skill criteria with Webb’s Depth of Knowledge Framework to norm rigor aligned with each level of mastery (corresponding to mastery grading levels) After-school tutoring (3x/week) and Saturday Academy (3x/semester) to support students in progressing with mastery skills in each course. District-Charter Collaborative (DCC): A group of five teachers will participate this year in a collaborative quad comprised of three other schools with a focus on special education including professional development 9th - 12th 9/6/18 - 6/25/19 9th - 12th 9th - 12th 9/6/18 - 6/25/19 9/6/18 - 6/25/19 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 6  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Curriculum Night September evening event will review with families the purpose of mastery-based learning, process for mastery based grading, access to the grading platform JumpRope , overview for interpreting student data, as well as the mastery skills by course and Habits for Success in each grade. This event will be planned in late August through early September by administration, the parent coordinator, and operations team. Teaching staff will be trained and will prepare curriculum overview in September.  Parent-Teacher Conferences (Fall and Spring) Conferences will focus on individual progress with the mastery skills and habits of success reviewed at Curriculum Night that are accessible on JumpRope. Teachers and administration will be prepared to help families interpret progress reports to understand students’ standing with credit accumulation and preparedness for Regents and AP exams. These events will be planned by administration, parent coordinator, and the operations team. Teaching staff will prepare for conferences during professional development prior to each conference.  Progress Reports Biweekly progress reports will be distributed with families to provide an update on progress with mastery skills and habits for success. The Guidance Team will generate progress reports and advisors will distribute the documentation to their respective student groups.  Monthly PTA Meetings A portion of each monthly PTA meeting will be devoted to deepening families’ understanding of mastery-based learning. The Parent Coordinator will facilitate with the support of the PTA in coordination with the principal  Genius Speaker Series Events targeted to students and parents with focus on exposure to professionals in the tech industry. The events include a moderated panel format that focuses on how each panelist became interested in technology, the education required to enter the field, and the job prospectus of his or her field.  Breakfast with the Principal Monthly event in which the principal hosts parents to answer questions, address concerns, and to celebrate school success. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. JumpRope license fee and professional development   Biweekly coordination and training meetings for Grade Team Leads and Department Leads  Mastery Collaborative  New Visions Data Portal Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 90% of students in 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th grades will earn 5+ credits in Fall Semester of 2018, as determined by final grades reported at the end of January 2019 using JumpRope grading platform. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Progress will be monitored using the following instruments: 7  Assistant Principal and Lead of each Academy will monitor Jumprope to review student progress JumpRope Grading Platform (Back Office and Admin Dashboard features) New Visions Data Portal STARS Report 3.03 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The Academy for Software Engineering establishes a safe and supportive environment through fostering a culture of trust and respect. The school is founded around the values of Voice, Visibility and Value that are reflected in school decision-making and reinforced through interactions between stakeholders. In order to increase personalization, and deepen the connection between students and the school, students participate in a daily Advisory program as well as monthly Town Halls by academy. Over the course of the past two years, the school has developed its Restorative Justice program. In the first year, 2016-2017, the school set the following priorities: community circles in advisory, content circles in classrooms, and the expectation that teachers greet students at the door at the start of each period. In the second year, 2016-2017, in addition to sustaining the priorities from the fist year, the following additional structures were added to support the program: a Restorative Justice Committee, which is comprised of various stakeholders for purpose of reviewing implementation and determining next steps; and a Restorative Justice Team, which is comprised of students trained in mediation. For next year, 2018-2019, the third year of the program will be fortified by Peer Group Connection (PGC), which will train students in the Upper Academy to push in to 9th grade advisories to facilitate community building activities, as well as further development of a social-emotional education program with anemphasis on 9  lessons that challenge students to reflect on personal and social issues through the advisory program. Each advisor is expected to consistently monitor academic, behavioral and attendance data for each student, and to hold an academic conference and speak with each parent by phone at least once over the course of the month, and to document each interaction by using a tracker to record interactions. Teachers are supported by the social work and administrative teams to address behavioral challenges through using an online referral system that records detailed information and serves a source of data to identify behavioral trends for groups and individual students. Additionally, the school introduced a dean last year, which increased responsiveness to teacher concerns and reduced students referred for consistent classroom disruption. From 2015-16 to 2016-17, the school made significant gains in reduction of Level 3 - 5 incidents (55% decrease) and total suspensions (46%). The school was able to sustain these improvements for the year 2017-18. The school did not reach its CEP goal of 80% of students with an attendance rate of 90% or better, but decreased the percentage of students chronically absent from 33% to 26%, following an improvement of 8% from 2015-16 to 2016-17. Our overall attendance rate held close to the previous rate of 90.0% with a rate of 89.8% for 2017-18. We were able to make gains in reduction of students chronically absent by instituting a daily robo-call system that called the parent of each student absent. This helped to keep parents informed about student attendance. We also, in addition to the interventions conducted by the social worker, and calls conducted by advisors, we added a per session position focused exclusively on the senior class to reengage and keep students on track for graduation. 0  The priority areas for SY18-19 are to expand the Restorative Justice program through Peer Group Connection, implement more frequent use of peer mediation, and conduct weekly restorative circles as an alternative to detention. We believe that connection ]to community through participation in restorative practices contributes to increased community engagement and improved overall attendance. In order to attain the stated goal of 80% of students with 90% or better attendance, we will continue the systems that were put in place this year that resulted in gains, and add to that a weekly tracker with a tab for each advisor that lists students whose parent must be called during Parent Engagement. This will help us to more systematically create accountability for parent outreach by advisors and to effectively organize and monitor outreach. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 80% of student population will have 90% year-end attendance rate by June 2019 as indicated by ATS attendance reports represented in the New Visions data portal. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Attendance Team, including the Parent Coordinator and Social Worker, will continue to closely monitor attendance data by school, cohort and individual student. The team will introduce and update a tracker for advisors that lists students for whom outreach to parent must be conducted during Parent Engagement. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Advisees 9/5/18 – 6/25/19 Advisors Social Work Guidance Counselors Administration Academy Leads Attendance Team Advisors Social Work Administration Implementation of a strategic action plan that designates responsibility for data monitoring, intervention, follow up and documentation based on percentage of present according to the following: Students < 90% attendance 9/5/18 – 6/25/19 80 - 90%: Advisors 70 - 79%: Social Work 0 - 69%: Administration The Attendance Team will work with Advisors to conduct weekly monitoring and communication with families to ensure they are aware of their child's attendance and impact on academic performance. Establish progressive steps of intervention based on number of days absent: Advisees 9/5/18 – 6/25/19 Advisors 1. 6 Days: Phone Call (Social Work) 2. 9 Days: Letter Home 3. 12 Days: Request Meeting 4. 15 Days: Home Visit Social Worker Guidance Counselor Principal 5. 18 Days: Intervention meeting to address chronic absenteeism 2 Continuation of a robo-call system in which parents of students who are absent will be notified to increase positive attendance and to curtail lateness. Students 9/5/18 – 6/25/19 Parent Coordinator Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will take the following steps to engage parents in supporting a positive school environment: 1. The school will continue to use a robo-call system in which the parent of a student absence by 4:00 PM each day through use of a function of the new school website. 2. Weekly Priorities email will be sent each Sunday evening by the Parent Coordinator that outlines important events and key "priorities" for the week for families to be aware of and participate. 3. Weekly Highlights email will be sent to families that highlight schoolwide events, students of the week, and a staff member spotlight. The email is to showcase the "faces" of AFSE and the work that is occurring. 4. Advisors will make use of weekly Parent Engagement to make contact parents of each advisee at least once per month and record outcomes in JumpRope. 5. School Dean will make contact with parent of each student involved in a behavioral incident. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. CAASS JumpRope Google Systems Advisors, Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, and Administration Parent Engagement (Weekly) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 80% of students with 90% attendance rate in January 31, 2019. We will track this data using our Attendance Heat Map, CAASS, and ATS report (RCUA) to review individual and cohort trends. 3  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We make use of ATS and the New Visions Data Portal to review attendance, JumpRope to review Attendance and Behavior, and OORS to review school climate data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. AFSE teachers collaborate across department, grade, academy and advisory teams to coordinate supports for all students’ academic and social-emotional development. In addition to these teams, teachers will have the opportunity to participate in the District-Charter Collaborative (DCC), Restorative Justice Committee, and the Instructional Leadership Team. Staff will also have the opportunity to join and contribute toward one of the following Focus Groups: Habits for Success, Mastery Based Grading, Restorative Justice, Efficient Communication, and Grading Practices to advance their professional learning aligned with AFSE’s instructional vision and goals. 1. School’s strengths relative to Collaborative Teachers:  Overall increase in framework element score on School Survey: The Multi-Year Summary of our current School Quality Guide shows an overall increase in positive responses on the School Survey related to Collaborative Teachers from 3.64 in 2015-2016 to 3.82 in 2016-2017 and 4.10 in 2017-18 . Specifically, 100% of teachers say that at their school the principal, teachers, and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively.  Danielson components aligned with Collaborative Teachers: Per the Advance Observation Dashboard, 80% of our teachers rated as Effective and 18% rated as Highly Effective in component 4e (Growing and Developing Professionally).  Quality Review aligned with Collaborative Teachers: In our 2018 Quality Review, we were rated as Proficient for 4.2 (Professional Collaborations) . 2. School’s priority needs relative to Collaborative Teachers:  Professional development alignment with instructional goals: Per the 2017-2018 School Survey, teacher responses provided the following areas for improvement in Quality of Professional Development: 85% responded that PD experiences were sustained and coherently focused (Q10a); 76% indicated that PD experiences provided sufficient time to try out new ideas (Q10b).  Collaboration with other schools: Per the 2017-2018 School Survey, 53% of teachers indicated that their professional development experiences included opportunities to work with teachers from other schools (Q10d), down from 58% in 2016-2017. Lesson Planning: According to data in Advance, 70% of teachers were rated effective in 1e (planning & preparation). In order to effectively assess students, we realize that clear learning objectives must be both established and measurable.  Part 2 – Annual Goal 5  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teachers will demonstrate effectiveness for Planning & Preparation at a rate of 90% or better by June 2019 according to the Danielson Framework through a process of professional learning, including workshops, that result in lesson plans that are aligned from the learning objective to the assessment. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Pre-service training to introduce teachers to development of aligned lesson planning, and to engage in development of rubrics aligned to measurable outcome established in the objective for the lesson plan. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 9th - 12th 9/5/18 – 6/25/19 Principal Engage in 3 inquiry cycles (“cycles of learning”) to refine teacher-student and student-student in-class feedback practices. 9th - 12th 9/5/18 – 6/25/19 Assistant Principals Teachers Principal Assistant Principals District-Charter Collaborative (DCC) Team Principal Assistant Principals Instructional Leadership Team Assistant Principals Grade Team Leads Department Leads Assistant Principals Administrative Interns Review of progress of lesson plan development based on Advance observation reports (1e), and outcomes of classroom visits and review of the Whiteboard Configuration, during Instructional Leadership Team meetings for purpose of identifying trends and developing actionable next steps. 9th - 12th 9/5/18 – 6/25/19 Development of a Professional Development team to establish a calendar of professional learning focused 9th - 12th 9/5/18 – 6/25/19 Individual teacher coaching cycles with administrative interns to improve practice aligned with Danielson component 3d 9/5/18 – 6/25/19 Teachers with Developing rating in component 3d 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 7  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Curriculum Night: September evening event will introduce families to AFSE’s next phase of mastery-based learning implementation, introduce them to JumpRope and how to interpret student growth data, and review mastery skills and habits for success for each grade. This event will be planned in late August/early September with administration and the Parent Coordinator. Teaching staff will be trained and will prepare curriculum overview in early September.  Parent-Teacher Conferences (Fall and Spring): Conferences will focus on individual progress with the mastery skills and habits of success reviewed at Curriculum Night and visible on the JumpRope grading platform. Teachers and administration will be prepared to help families interpret progress reports to understand students’ standing with credit accumulation and preparedness for Regents and AP exams. These events will be planned with administration and the Parent Coordinator. Teaching staff will prepare for conferences during Monday professional development time prior to each conference.  Open School Days: Although families are always welcome to visit and observe instruction, the school will hold two “Open School” days each semester to allow families to see the coursework students are engaging in across grade levels and departments. The focus of these days will be in deepening families’ understanding of mastery-based learning by seeing examples of best practice. These “Open School” days will be facilitated by the Parent Coordinator, Mastery Team, and the administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  New Visions LP/UTR Team  Mastery Collaborative Incubator Program  Administrative intern training  Professional development texts aligned with mastery-based assessment  Monday Professional Development time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 80% of teachers will have implemented feedback leading to increased effective practices in as as measured by effective planning and preparation practices that includes learning objectives clearly aligned to assessment through an analysis of teacher ratings in Advance . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be monitored using the following instruments:  Advance Observation Dashboard  MOTP Score Tracker reports  Administrative intern and Admin shared feedback logs in Google docs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A primary goal for the Academy for Software Engineering since its inception in 2012 has been to build a structure for distributive leadership in order to develop a strong foundation for continued sustainability. Our goal is to create an infrastructure in which the success of the school does not rely on any one individual but rather on systems and “duos” of individuals who are trained and prepared to manage and execute specific bodies of work so that the absence of a teacher or staff member does not significantly or negatively effect productivity. For the past five years we have developed the decision-making capacity of teacher leaders, guidance, and administrative staff so that we cultivate a group of individuals who are able to collaborate and contribute to making school-wide decisions specific to the school’s instructional program, college and career initiatives, and overall operational systems. For 2017-2018, we re-structured the school to create two academies (upper and lower) to enable smaller teams to focus on a smaller subset of students with learning needs unique to each group. Each academy is led by an administrator and a designated teacher leader. In order to build staff capacity we have participated in the following opportunities: 1) Learning Partners Program UTR host school - principal, assistant principal, and 4 teachers are identified as "model" educators 2) Mastery Collaborative and Progressive Redesign Opportunity Schools for Excellence (PROSE) 0  3) Leaders in Education Apprenticeship Program (LEAP) through the NYCDOE Office of Leadership 4) Integrated CoTeaching Lab Site 5) Teacher Leadership Program (TLP) through the NYCDOE Office of Leadership 6) Math for America fellows in mathematics, science, and computer science This year we will be participating in the District-Charter Collaborative (DCC). This will give teachers the opportunity to engage in professional learning with teachers from other schools. The program will be be led by a teacher in the capacity of the Site Coordinator. Additionally, we will be entering the first year of Peer Group Connection (PGC). The program provides the opportunity for two teachers to hold leadership roles in the capacity of Co-Coordinators. At the end of school year 2017-18, we posted a list of the projected leadership opportunities for the following year. The purpose of this was to create more transparency with respect to identification of school leaders. Interested teachers were invited to ' submit an application indicated reason for interest and qualifications. This year we will focus on refining and scaling Effective School Leadership across the staff. In order to prepare and and account for the normal annual attrition of staff, our goal is to ensure sustainability by building the leadership skills in staff members who have been identified as ready for additional leadership opportunities. We will continue to refine our leadership structures so that identified leaders are having more opportunities for ownership and overall design of specific bodies of work. It will be critical that the principal and assistant principal provide coaching and resource access to optimize the capacity building opportunities for school leaders. We believe by identifying key staff members, building their leadership capacity, and giving them 1  more opportunities to design and execute key initiatives, we can continue to cultivate a pipeline of staff who will be able to take on more responsibilities and enhance the overall effectiveness of the school. For 2018-19, through opening up opportunities to invitation, and selecting the best candidates form those who applied, both to increase transparency and to diversify staff who hold leadership positions, it will be critical to provide appropriate planning on team management and facilitation. The two roles of Academy Lead will be critical to support due to the number of responsibilities. In order to address this priority, each Academy Lead will be paired with an Assistant Principal, who will model the role in the first semester, including data analysis, and incrementally assign more responsibility through the year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. The goal for 2018-19 is for 75% of teachers to assume a leadership position or to participate on a committee or team that supports school improvement. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Refine the role of Academy Lead to include frequent monitoring of data (attendance, mastery, behavior) for an academy (upper or lower), and provide each teacher designated as Academy Lead with intensive coaching support and supervision. Develop a framework for leadership development at the Academy for Software Engineering that includes an outline of roles, overview of responsibilities, and criteria for effective leadership. Conduct an initial evaluation by Administration of school staff and have school staff self-assess by using a performance rubric and core competencies. Review with staff leaders the criteria for 4e (professional development) at the Beginning (BOY), Middle (MOY), and End of Year (EOY)meetings to self-assess and set goals for further development along the scale of the Danielson framework. Provide periodic coaching of staff leaders at Professional Development that includes engaging with text-based resources, modelling, and role play to provide practice opportunities for reflection and feedback. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers and staff 9/5/18 – 6/25/19 Principal Asst. Principals Dept. & Grade Team Leads Participants in leadership programs 9/5/18 – 6/25/19 Principal Asst. Principals Staff Leaders 9/5/18 – 6/25/19 Principal Assistant Principals Staff Leaders 9/5/18 – 6/25/19 Principal Asst. Principals Staff Leaders 9/5/18 – 6/25/19 Principal Asst. Principals Staff Leaders Identified leaders and participants in the leadership programs listed above Identified leaders and participants in the leadership programs listed above Identified leaders and participants in the leadership programs listed above Identified leaders and participants in the leadership programs listed above 3  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will continue to showcase the contributions of staff members in our Weekly Highlights email to families. We will provide updates of important initiatives led by identified staff at PTA and SLT meetings. We will introduce staff by leadership position at events such as Curriculum Night, Open House, and other school-based events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Key staff leaders SOM template Google links and documentation Documents from each leadership program (ie., DCC, PGC) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At Middle of Year (MOY) meetings, each teacher-leader will meet with an administrator to review progress along the scale of 4e for Professional Development. As an outcome of these meetings, and aligned with the goal, 20% of teachers would be at Highly Effective by end of January. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. AFSE Core Competencies Framework and Rubric AFSE Self-Assessment form survey Meeting and coaching notes Danielson Framework (4e) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Academy for Software Engineering values the support and input of the parent community, and strives to establish strong community connections that provide opportunities for students to grow and develop in preparation for college and career. The school puts an emphasis on consistent and thorough communication with families through automated calls, two weekly emails (Sunday Weekly Priorities and Friday Week in Review and Highlights), and monthly calls by advisors to ensure that parents are well informed about school initiatives, opportunities, and student mastery. In addition to engaging families through Curriculum Night, Parent Teacher Conferences, and participation in the PTA, families are invited to attend events such as the Genius Speaker Series, which expose students and families to representatives from various fields of technology; College Night and Financial Aid night; and Special Education Information Night. Based on School Quality Guide data: - 89% of families answered positively that the school conducts regular communication, - 93% that they feel well informed as a result of the communication, and - 91% that the teachers work closely with families in support of student needs. In addition to leveraging the support of parents to improve student achievement, AFSE has developed strong partnerships in the public and private sector that have yielded important opportunities and experiences for students. This year students had the opportunity to visit the Tech Fair, Federal Reserve, and to learn from from industry leaders through tours and job shadowing. The iMentor program, which pairs each students with a 5  professional mentor, provides essential guidance related to college and career. An important priority is to develop workshops and learning opportunities for parents that are responsive to parent needs and interests based on feedback. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Earn 4.0 or above score on Strong Family and Community Ties in Framework for Great Schools Report by the end of June 2019 that is measured through parental response on the Learning Environment Survey. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Conduct Q&A sessions with families about iMentor classes and evening events to ensure understanding of value and opportunities of mentorship. All students 9/5/18 – 6/25/19 iMentor program managers All families 9/5/18 – 6/25/19 Administration Advisors PTA Parent Coordinator All families 9/5/18 – 6/25/19 PTAParent CoordinatorAll staff Distribution of two weekly emails to families: one focused on important activities, events, and announcements to increase participation and family involvement, and the second to share highlights of the week with the school community. Coordination of a Parent/Family Mixer to provide opportunity for families to meet and mingle and to find out about outside programs.Design workshops and learning opportunities for families based on needs and interest at least 1 x month. We will administer two surveys (Fall & Spring) and compare the data with the Learning Environment Survey at the end of the year to analyze results and next steps for improvement and to find out needs. Participation by parents in school wide events including game nights, dances, talent shows, and Genius Speaker Series. All students and families 9/5/18 – 6/25/19 PTA All staff Develop one-pager about all AFSE programs and expectations for each grade level so that families can focus on what is important for their child in each grade. All students and families By 9/5/18 Staff and PTA Executive Board Distribution of Student Opportunities via email with notices concerning internships and other CS/tech related activities outside of school. All students and families 9/5/18 – 6/25/19 Work-based learning coordinator and guidance counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. iMentor OneGoal CSNYC 7  Peer Group Connection Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PTA SLT iMentors Staff Partners including CSNYC Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 85% positive response on internal school and PTA survey by January 31, 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SurveyMonkey Mailchimp Google Form Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students entering with Level 1 8th Grade ELA Score Students with < 65 in ELA class Students entering with Level 1 8th Grade Math Score Students with < 65 in math class Science Students with < 65 in science class Social Studies Students with < 65 in history class Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Tutoring and small group Tutoring and small group Tutoring and small group Tutoring and small group Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Review and supplemental instruction focused on critical reading skills and foundational writing. Review and supplement instruction in pre-Algebra and Algebra skill, Geometry, or Alg. II/Trigonometry which students struggle with and in preparation for all math Regents. Review and supplemental instruction centered on principles of Living Environment, Earth Science, and Chemistry in preparation for LE, Earth Science, and Chemistry Regents. Review and supplemental instruction in critical focus for Global History and US History courses in preparation for the Global History and US When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) After school and Saturday tutoring sessions. Small group during study hall sessions during the school day. After school and Saturday tutoring sessions. Small group during study hall sessions during the school day. After school and Saturday tutoring sessions. Small group during study hall sessions during the school day. After school and Saturday tutoring sessions. Small group during study hall sessions during the school day. 9  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students with more than 3 student referrals Students in temporary housing History Regents Examinations Counseling by Guidance Counselor and/or Social Worker Student Referral PBIS Approach Small group and one-to-one During the school day 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 16 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We purchase necessities including school supplies, clothing, and other essentials to provide students in temporary housing throughout the year. We speak with the families to ensure their privacy and preserve their dignity so that we can make sure that the students receive the necessary supplies needed to be productive in school. We offer counseling to students with our social workers throughout the school day and entire year. We conduct check-ins particularly during the winter months to ensure that students have the proper clothing and necessities based on needs. We also offer after school tutoring so that students stay after school and receive academic support along with snacks. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Does not apply 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  Does not apply 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Does not apply 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. AFSE participates in and works closely with New Visions and the NYCDOE to identify and recruit highly qualified teachers. We focus on candidates who are affiliated with organizations such as Math for America, the Urban Teacher Resident program with Hunter College, and Peace Corps Fellows. In order to recruit, retain, and grow our teachers we have an extensive teacher engagement program that includes the following: Participation in on-boarding program that focuses on building teacher capacity in mastery based learning, Danielson Framework, and Google applications and lead by teacher leaders. We have a summer and year long induction program in which new teachers are mentored by experienced teachers and supported with targeted capacity-building activities in instruction, professionalism, and AFSE-specific culture. Participation in curriculum development workshops focused on mastery-based learning and planning including identifying mastery skills and content during summer and throughout the year with department, co-teachers, and grade teams. Participation in outside PDs including a2i (Algebra); Learning Partners Program; Math for America; Facing 3  History; and New Visions SPED and course-specific workshops. Participation in teacher leadership including UTR model teachers and PROSE Participation in performance recognition - Teacher of the Month Superlative Participation in distributive leadership opportunities including a leadership pathway with added responsibilities including through the NYCDOE Office of Leadership via LEAP, Teacher Leadership, and Mastery Collaborative. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Participation in weekly PD and Parent Engagement sessions planned by teachers and Admin that focuses on CCLS, curriculum design, student work analysis, and parent meetings Teachers and other staff participating in leadership programs including CLASS (Hunter) to develop instructional leadership, the Urban Teacher Resident Learning Partners Program (LPP), Teacher Leadership (Office of Leadership), ICT SPED Lab, and Mastery Collaborative. Staff participate in at least two outside of the school PDs relevant to specific role and responsibilities - staff look for these opportunities and participate accordingly during the school year Coaching for math, science, and history teachers provided by Teachers College focused on unit development and revision. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 4  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher leaders and teachers contribute to the decision-making for assessments and other instructional issues. We accomplish this through the following: Measures of Student Learning committee comprised of teachers as selected by the UFT chapter leader and by Principal – committee discusses and determines MOSL for each of the departments and teachers. Department Leads meet together twice a month with Administration to discuss instruction including the design, use, and administration of assessments. Pilot with our AP team (i.e. AP Language) in which students participate in portfolio development and defend their learning through their defense of learning presentation. Professional Development targeted task analysis that occurs 4 x a year to ensure data is evaluated and used for refinement in instruction. 5  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 4, 5, 6 NA NA NA Section 4, 5, 6 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $230,877 $0 $ 0 $0 $3,352,647 X NA NA NA X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use. 6   A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Academy for Software Engineering, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students AFSE will support parents and families of Title I students by: * offering materials (and translated as necessary) including academic summaries, progress reports, college and career readiness one pagers in order for parents to be more informed about AFSE's academic program; * providing parents through the PTA and SLT meetings as well as during Curriculum Night (2 x year) and Parent Teacher Conferences (2 x year) with trainings in JumpRope, school accounts, lunch forms, and other key aspects of school so that parents can be sure to understand how to support their child. * cultivating relationships with families through the AFSE Crew and College Huddle and Guidance team which includes weekly communication via email and phone and supports such as resources including "7 Effective Habits for Teens" to to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s development; 8  * providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments using our academic one pagers and summaries; * sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand including on the website, emails, and newsletters; * providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will have the AFSE Parent Coordinator, Community Assistant, the PTA, SLT, and school leadership work collaboratively to design, execute, and measure progress/success using the various tools to increase active participation including: * ensure the communication of Title I meetings by informing families via email, website, and phone about meetings 10 school days before and offering a schedule of meeting dates in October for the remainder of the year; * post important information, events, and communication the AFSE parent page to include Title I requirements; * involve and engage parents through SLT, PTA, and other events in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; * engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; * ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; * support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; * maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and 9  families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; * provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; * host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Educating All Students (ESSA) Act; * schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; * translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement * hosting a PTA Potluck during the AFSE Curriculum Night in September and a Byte of AFSE in May to build relationships with the school and with other families; * working with partner Cleary Gottlieb to host a parent mixer 2 x year for parents to learn about Cleary programs while also mingling with and networking with other parents; * holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference during a PTA meeting(s) and ensuring appropriate communication beforehand to maximize participation; * hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year - every 3rd Friday is a Student Activities Event Night in which families are invited (i.e. Game Night; Family Basketball Tournament, etc.) * encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; 0  * hosting a parent/guardian mixer hosted by Cleary Gottlieb so that parents/guardians can mingle and develop relationships; * organizing with the PTA the continuation of the AFSE Genius Series in which families participate in tech related workshops with industry professionals on Saturdays (4 per year); * developing parent resources and making it available on afsenyc.org; * offering chaperone and volunteer opportunities for families to participate in school functions (i.e. dances; overnight field trips) * working with the PTA to develop a parent newsletter; * sending out Friday Week in Review newsletter with school wide events, student spotlight, and staff spotlight. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Academy for Software Engineering (AFSE) , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum * maximizing academic learning time to increase student performance; * respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; * implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards to develop college and career readiness; * offering high quality instruction in all content areas and helping students develop mastery of critical skills; * providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Educating All Students (ESSA) Act; * continuing to develop academically rich and real-world applicable curricula. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 1  * convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to October 30 of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; * arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; * respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; * providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; * involving parents in the planning process during PTA and SLT meetings to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; * providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; * providing and ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; * sending out weekly emails (Monday Morning Weekly Priorities and Friday Week in Review) to families using Mailchimp to update and inform families of school events and activities; * developing one-pagers of key AFSE initiatives as well as grade-specific academic one-pagers to give families overview of each grade. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff * ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; * notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2  * arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; * planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: * creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; * assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); * sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; * supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; * ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; * advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Educating All Students (ESSA) Act Title I requirement for Elementary Secondary Education Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities * monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school before 9:00 am for first period and follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; * check JumpRope, AFSEnyc.org, and weekly emails to monitor my child's academic progress; * discuss current events with my child so that they can be more aware of the world around them and bring their learning to school; 3  * set limits on screen time to ensure responsible use of technology; * promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; * encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; * volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; * participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education by attending PTA and SLT meetings and school events; * communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; * respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; * become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; * participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; * take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; * share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities * attend school regularly and arrive on time; * complete homework and submit all assignments on time; * follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; * show respect for myself, other people and property; * try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; * be a learner and work to develop the competencies for success. 4  5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 2 School Name Academy for Software Engineering Borough Manhattan School Number 546 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Seung Yu Coach Courtney Brown ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Christine Thelen Teacher/Subject Area Susan Bodok / Spanish & ESL Teacher/Subject Area Kelsey Thomas / Special Ed Related-Service Provider Jaime Samson / Speech Superintendent Donald Conyers Assistant Principal Melanie Mac Coach N/A School Counselor Suzanne Zeitlin-Mellor Parent Andrea Hernandez Parent Coordinator Ashley Cameron Field Support Center Staff Member Anna Vasquez Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 6  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) Total number of ELLs ELLs as share of total student population (%) % Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Lang. NA NA NA NA NA NA Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? All incoming 9th graders participate in a Summer Bridge Program in late August prior to the start of the school year for the purposes of the following:1) introduce and have students be familiarized with AFSE expectations; and 2) administer initial numeracy and literacy diagnostics We use a combination of teacher-developed reading and writing diagnostic assessments graded with a common rubric and Achieve 3000 to determine students lexile reading levels (initial, growth) for the school year. We emphasize development of reading and writing skills in all grades 9th - 12th by providing extended time in the English (240 7  total minutes per week) courses. We monitor student data in grade teams and as a Language Proficiency team three times each semester during our three "benchmark periods" to look for patterns to determine instructional and programmatic decisions. After identifying a common need amongst ELL with formal writing structure and non-fiction reading comprehension, we implemented grade-wide strategies for TIED paragraph structure and for annotating non-fiction texts. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We are implementing the following structures to support our efforts with ELL students: 1) Grade bands (9th/10th and 11th/12th) with grade and Advisory teams monitoring ELL students 2) Two ENL teachers to work with ELL students 3) Two teacher leaders monitoring, analyzing, and reviewing data for patterns 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our ENL program effectiveness is determined by the following criteria: 1) acquisition of credit accumulation by semester and by year; 2) pass rates on designated Regents examinations; and 3) growth in annual NYSESLAT scores Our criteria for success is that students meet their academic requirements (10+ target credit accumulation and Regents examinations by grade) and demonstrate growth per the NYSESLAT (using EDAT targets). Additionally, we utilize anecdotal feedback from surveys and in-person interviews with students and families, and teachers about whether the supports provided are meeting student needs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The following structures are provided to address interventions: 1) Grade team, teacher leaders, and administration monitoring data of ELL students and determining appropriate instructional interventions; 2) Additional instructional and targeted time with ELL students during Advisory (40 min. x 5 per week) and before/after school tutoring time (60 min. x 2 per week) 3) Mastery-based learning and grading that focuses on specific, explicit "mastery" skills in literacy 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not applicable. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The following outcome assessments are used to evaluate and inform our ENL program: 1) NYSESLAT data (annual) 2) Living Environment OR Earth Science Regents (9th grade) 3) Global History Regents (10th grade) 4) English Regents (11th grade) Our NYSESLAT data suggests that our ELLs are making steady progress with language development. Over three years of data, we have seen that 30-40% of our ELL population reaches proficiency each school year. ELLs who enter our school in the 9th grade typically reach proficiency by the end of 10th grade. Typically our ELLs perform well in the Listening and Speaking components of the NYSESLAT, often reaching proficiency while continuing to need support in the Reading and Writing 8  components. Our Reading and Writing supports have moved students previously at the Intermediate level to the Advanced level within one school year. We have a small group of ELLs who have been at the Advanced/Expanding level for more than two years. We use the science Regents in 9th and Global History Regents in 10th as indicators for language acquisition because they are text heavy and vocabulary specific. Our students have performed adequately in both the science (80%+ pass rates) and Global (70%+). However, the students perform strongly on the English Regents in 11th grade with more than 90% earning a 65+ and 72% scoring a college ready score of 75+. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The following structures are in place to ensure adjustments are made accordingly: 1) Review and analysis of Regents and NYSELAT data by grade and department teams during Monday team meetings 2) Review of data to determine subsequent year programming between Administration and programming team 3) Data available in AFSE data folders Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The AFSE program consists of the following: 1) Rotational course schedule - core courses meet at least 4 x per week for 60 minutes per class for a total of 240 minutes per week 2) Heterogeneous groupings by grade level using various factors including 8th grade state ELA and math scores, attendance, SPED requirements, credit needs, and ELL needs. 3) Two teachers for ICT and in many instances we have two Gen. Ed. teachers co-teaching non-ICT courses Many of our classes have approximately 28 - 32 students and are of mixed proficiencies in both English and math. We believe the heterogeneous groupings allow for students to learn from each other and build both academic and social skills in a diverse learning environment. Students receive 60-minute periods of English 4 days a week for a total of 240 minutes and ENL instruction is primarily integrated into these English classes. The 9th grade English class focuses on reading and writing of fiction, non-fiction, and informational texts so students develop reading comprehension and formal writing skills. Moreover, students also learn and practice various genres and considering literary elements such as audience, word choice, and style. Students at the Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding levels in 9th grade receive their ENL support integrated into the English classes. Students at the Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding levels in 10th grade receive their ENL support integrated into Global History class as this is a key Regents exam in sophomore year that requires extensive reading comprehension, analysis, and formal writing application. Students at the Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding levels in 11th grade receive ENL support integrated in English classes that focus on preparation for the Common Core ELA Regents Exam. For 12th grade students they receive ENL support integrated into the College Writing class that emphasizes college essay writing. Students at the Entering and Emerging levels are programmed in 9  a standalone ENL class that is 40-minutes per class and meets 4-5 times per week based on students' required minutes. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The program is developed to maximize the amount of time ELLs spend in courses centering around reading, writing, and language development. Students at the Commanding level receive their minimum of 90 minutes per week of ENL instruction integrated into a content class. Students at the Expanding level receive their minimum of 180 minutes per week of ENL instruction integrated into a content class. Students at the Transitioning level receive their minimum of 180 minutes per week of ENL instruction integrated into a content class. Students at the Emerging level receive 120 minutes of standalone ENL instruction and 240 minutes of ENL instruction integrated into a content class each week. We do not currently have any students in the Entering level who require 540 minutes of ENL instruction per week. We hired an additional ENL teacher to support our ELL students to ensure that the instructional minutes are met. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our school follows a mastery-based learning model which is particularly supportive of ELLs as there is flexibility with time, measurable learning objectives, and mastery criteria that codify the continuum of learning and identifies growth areas. Each course is organized around Regents and Common Core-aligned mastery skills which students practice and work towards proficiency over the course of the semester. Instructional approaches and specific strategies are identified for each level of mastery of each mastery skill, so teachers employ the appropriate instructional approach for a students' given level. The semester is divided into three benchmark periods in which teachers assess students' progress towards mastery skills and hold targeted remediation and practice sessions for students who have not yet reached proficiency. The ESL Coordinator is instrumental throughout the mastery process as she collaborates with grade team leads to identify appropriate instructional approaches for each level of mastery of skills related to targeted language modalities. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Home language resources are provided to students within their classes to supplement English resources (dictionaries, technology, texts in home language). For summative assessments and Regents Exams, students are provided the option of taking the exam in their home language (if it is one of the 5 languages offered), using translation dictionaries or being provided direct translation of words. The assessment is scored by a school staff member or if a staff member does not read or write in the home language, the Translation and Interpretation Unit is utilized. Students receive feedback and a final score on their assessments taken in their home language. We continue to check student progress throughout the year to determine what additional supports including native language is needed. In high school freestanding ENL programs, there are no required home language assessments beyond the Spanish LAB-R during the ELL identification process. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 0  A. The ESL Coordinator and other ENL teacher identifies and facilitates interventions for students identified as having low native language literacy and low numeracy. Such interventions include placement in the freestanding ENL class, providing native language tutoring and content-specific materials and/or after-school enrichment tutoring. We also offer referrals to outside organizations that provide additional ESL support. B. Our newcomers have historically been placed in an English/ESL class with a heavy focus on explicit instruction of reading and writing strategies, extensive scaffolding of projects and major assignments, and differentiation of reading and homework assignments based on language ability. Additionally, our newcomer ELLs were provided with additional resources such as Empower3000 and Pearson Writing Center to target basic English skills. C. Both in-house and NYSESLAT data have shown us that our ELLs who have been receiving services for 4-6 years are in need of academic intervention in reading and writing. As such, the school has adopted uniform reading and writing strategies across English, Social Studies, and Science classes. The consistency and repetition of these strategies in all classes supports continued development of reading comprehension, vocabulary development, and structured writing skills. Vocabulary development is a heavy focus among this subgroup because academic vocabulary aids in students' comprehension in class as well as their ability to express themselves in speaking and writing. As such, all content teachers of ELLs explicitly teach content vocabulary. D. The ESL Coordinator has identified long-term ELLs, who have been receiving service for 7 or more enrolled school years in the NYCDOE, are in need of academic intervention in reading and writing. As such, the school has adopted uniform reading and writing strategies across content areas. The consistency and repetition of these strategies in all classes supports continued development of reading comprehension, vocabulary development, and structured writing skills. Additionally, long-term ELLs are offered after-school enrichment tutoring. E. Former ELLs, on a case by case basis, are programmed for their minimum of 90 minutes of ENL instruction per week for two years following reaching proficiency. For those who continue to require support in reading and writing in specific content areas, they may be programmed in the ELL block for those content areas, and programmed for mainstream blocks in other content areas. Lunchtime and after school tutoring is provided to former ELLs, with a specific focus on supporting them with writing. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We focus on problem solving and approaches that force students to develop strategies to getting "unstuck". We develop curriculum using grade-level texts as well as online programs including Delta Math, Achieve 3000, and Castle Learning to accelerate language development. All staff, including ENL and Special Education teachers, have received training in best practices for co-teaching, Universal Design for Learning, and Understanding by Design. Use of UDL strategies ensures that there are strategic entry points in each lesson for each learner. UDL is utilized in breaking down units into lesson plans that provide multiple entry points for all learners. A variety of grade level materials are incorporated into unit and lesson design to provide appropriate supports for ELL SWDs including reference books (bilingual dictionaries, thesauruses, glossaries), visuals (posters, graphic novels, graphic organizers), manipulatives, and resources in students' native languages. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our program and overall schedule is designed to maximize instructional and enrichment time for students. We incorporate 60 minute periods and our core classes meet at least 4 x week with many of these courses having two teachers. Additionally, our use of Advisory and enrichment before and after school allows students to receive additional academic support. Lastly, our school uses data from our Google applications that allows all staff members to be aware of student progress. We closely monitor and track student data. Curricular flexibility to support language and academic development is a school-wide goal that is being addressed with the use of co-teaching best practices and implementation of UDL in unit and lesson planning. Instructional flexibility is providing through our ICT and push-in/pull-out models of support. ICT pairs in classes with ELL SWDs use a collaborative planning template that ensures there is an individualized plan for each ELL with an IEP. As for scheduling flexibility, 9th grade ELL SWDs are in ICT classes for English, Living Environment, and CC Algebra. In the 10th grade, there are ICT classes for English, Global History, Earth Science, and CC Geometry. If students have SETSS then specific strategies and skills are taught and practiced during this time. 1  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. For ELLs earning a grade of 70 or lower in ELA, Math, and other content areas and/or identified as SIFE and/or Entering through Emerging ENL levels, students receive targeted ELA, Math, and content areas interventions through lunchtime and after school tutoring, Saturday Academy, weekly assignments on Empower3000 and DeltaMath, adaptive online programs that provide specific skill reinforcement. Both programs provide teachers with data that is used to design classroom instruction to address identified needs in ELA and Math. Additionally, our school's targeted interventions stem from the school-wide adoption of Universal Design for Learning and Understanding by Design. As UDL is a framework that supports teachers in unit design that incorporates learning activities and assessments for all individuals and groups, including ELLs, teachers are able to break down differentiated units into lesson plans that provide entry points for all learners. A variety of grade level materials are incorporated into unit and lesson design to provide appropriate supports for ELLs: reference books (bilingual dictionaries, thesauruses, glossaries), visuals (posters, graphic novels, graphic organizers), manipulatives, and resources in students' native languages. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are looking to add an additional math elective in 9th grade to support students in their fundamental math skills and possibly adding a OneGoal (college preparation) English elective in 11th grade. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Standalone ENL courses do not conflict with students' course offerings--all ELLs are offered the same core classes and electives as non-ELL students. All school programs are communicated to ELLs through daily advisory announcements, weekly emails, weekly voicemails, monthly mailed communication, and bimonthly community town halls in the auditorium. All ELLs are matched with a professional mentor through our 4-year College and Career Readiness program with iMentor. ELLs communicate with their mentors on a weekly basis and meet with them in person at school on a monthly basis. All ELLs are matched with an academic advisor who meets with them daily to review academic progress, set goals, and work on College and Career Readiness targets. All ELLs are offered enrichment before and after school as well as Saturday school. Students are invited to stay and receive additional supports after school by academic advisors and teachers based on weekly progress reporting. School-based clubs meet twice weekly after school and are open to all students. The school counselor shares a weekly Student Opportunities page with myriad extracurricular clubs, activities, events, and internship opportunities. ELLs are informed of all school programs through verbal announcements made by their advisor, weekly email communications sent directly to students and parents, and monthly communications that are mailed home. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. A variety of home language resources are used to support ELLs, including dictionaries, translated texts, Rosetta Stone, and a variety of online platforms providing content in home languages. All students have access to laptops in each classroom in the school, as well as 2 computer labs (both Mac and PC). Each student has access to the school's Google domain with cloud-based folders for each course that include instructional materials and resources that can be used outside of class. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We only offer an ENL program model. We have an ESL teacher, a Spanish teacher who is also ESL certified, three content teachers, and an administrator who are fluent in Spanish. However, we work with our students to determine how to best meet the student's language needs including providing native language support if necessary. A variety of home language resources are used to support ELLs, including dictionaries, translated texts, Rosetta Stone, and a variety of online platforms providing content in home languages. 2  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Every decision and supports/resources correspond with our student's grade levels and to Common Core standards. We constantly work with the student and their families to prepare them for college and career readiness. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? A variety of home language resources are used to support ELLs, including dictionaries, translated texts, Rosetta Stone, and a variety of online platforms providing content in home languages. All students have access to laptops in each classroom in the school, as well as 2 computer labs (both Mac and PC). Each student has access to the school's Google domain with cloud-based folders for each course that include instructional materials and resources that can be used outside of class. We have not coordinated with the other schools related to ELL services; however, it is very much a consideration. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have a Summer Bridge program coordinated by the Parent Coordinator, grade team leads, and ESL Coordinator for all incoming 9th graders to administer English and math diagnostics as well as introduce them to our school and its philosophy. Additionally we have an Advisory program which matches a small group of students with an academic advisor who monitors academic progress and social/emotional development. Lastly, our students are provided with a professional mentor who assists with college and career readiness. ELLs who enroll throughout the school year meet individually with the ESL Coordinator and their new academic advisor to review their transcript and identify specific learning and social-emotional needs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language electives not offered until junior and senior years. Students are able to take a Spanish class. We have online software (i.e. Rosetta Stone - Spanish) installed in our computer labs and all of our laptops for students to have access. Our students also learn programming languages including Java and Python throughout their four years in high school in their computer science classes. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? As we continue to develop as a new school we are implementing professional development to ensure appropriate support for our ELL students. Teachers of ELLs have received training in Quality Teaching for English Learners (QTEL) through our affinity group. The focus of in-house ELL teacher development is to create authentic assessments of skill and content knowledge in English, Science, History, Math, PE, Arts, and LOTE aligned with mastery-based learning that are differentiated by level of 3  language proficiency and incorporate language goals into lessons. The PD plan includes the ESL teacher providing content-based support for teachers of ELLs in staff PD during our professional development time on Mondays. The secretary is provided training by the ESL teacher and supports the ESL teacher in each stage of ELL identification, documentation, and program implementation as a "checks and balance" to ensure all students are accounted for. This is provided by the ESL teacher on a bimonthly basis. The assistant principals participate in all staff PD identified above. One of the assistant principals is a licensed ESL teacher and often co-facilitates PD with the ESL Coordinator and teacher. Teachers of ELLs are receiving support in engaging ELLS in the CCLS through AFSE's affinity group, New Visions. New Visions is providing monthly ELA CCLS workshops that offer specific curricular and instructional guidance to support teachers in scaffolding skill development for ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Staff is provided with a weeklong intensive training in August to address the curricular and socio-emotional needs of all students, including ELLs as they transition from middle to high school and from high school to postsecondary plans. Additionally, one social worker works specifically with 9th and 10th grade teachers and advisors to coordinate academic and socio-emotional supports needed in the first years of high school. In order to help students transition from middle to high school we offer an Advisory program to all of our students. Advisories meet 5 times a week and is a program where no more than 15 students are matched to a faculty member. Through AFSE's teacher development program, all teachers of ELLs receive professional development in reading and writing strategies for ELLs for one hour once each month, which exceeds the minimum ELL training for General Education teachers and meets the minimum ELL training for ENL teachers. The school’s program includes a weekly 55 minute planning time for departments and 80 minutes for staff development meetings in which all teachers meet to differentiate instruction and identify common strategies for supporting students, including ELLs and ELL SWDs. The ESL teacher and coordinator facilitates ELL training for all staff within the department and whole staff meeting times. Topics addressed include: a) applying the learning standards, b) improving formal writing, c) scaffolding instruction for ELLs in reading and writing, d) using technology as a tool to support language development, and e) explicit language instruction and vocabulary development. Records for professional development activities are kept in our SY17-18_Staff Professional Development Google sheet which is accessible to all staff members through the AFSE domain. Linked in the Google sheet are agendas and attendance for each professional development activity facilitated. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our lines of communication with our families are very open and transparent. Our teams meet with parents/guardians of English language learners at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. We call our parents/families regularly to inform them of school events, academic progress, attendance and tardiness. We encourage parent volunteers as well as active participation in our PTA to better support the school and to learn about important school information. We also email our families regularly with school announcements and information that pertains to their child personally. All email accounts for our faculty are made public to the families and we anticipate and encourage communication with the homes as often as needed. Parents can interact with the school and get information from a variety of other platforms: Jumprope, afsenyc.org, school messenger, social media, and our weekly Monday and Friday MailChimp emails to families. We also make our information available for families in a variety of languages to accommodate our diverse families. We utilize translation services for phone calls and also for face to face 4  meetings. We conduct many parent meetings throughout the year as well as during Parent Teacher Conference and Curriculum Night. Since we speak with parents regularly, we ask parents/families what supports we can provide them. We believe that through frequent communication, we can touch upon the many issues that parents would like addressed. Our school will support parents and families by: providing materials, training, and strategies to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology. During Parent Teacher Conferences and Curriculum Night we review with families the following: Jumprope registration, Achieve 3000 and Delta Math training, transcripts, progress reports, graduation requirements, etc. We also provide parents with the information and training needed to assist them as parents make sound educational decisions for their children. We give families materials so they better understand their parental and student rights within the school system which in turn helps them gain insight on City, State and Federal standards and assessments as well as give them a vast understanding of graduation requirements. We encourage and help foster a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress. We continuously share information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities. We often provide professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to assist with effective outreach. Lastly, we are working with our Advisory Board members and partners to possibly conduct computer literacy workshops for our parents/families. We want to extend these workshops to a Parent Academy specific to our school. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parents are active in our PTA, iMentor Events, College Initiative Events, and Recruitment workshops and open houses. Communication about all of these events is provided in home languages and translation is provided at events. All school-based activities and external opportunities (i.e. workshops for families, students, and/or parents) are communicated by our Parent Coordinator through daily in-person meetings and phone calls, weekly voicemails and individual email correspondence, and monthly mailings. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. The focus of our school centers on Computer Science and problem solving. We recognize that programming involves strong math and literacy skills, which is why we offer longer instructional time and classes that build on these areas. We offer students multiple English classes (English core, iMentor, OneGoal, AP Language & Composition) and math classes (CC Algebra, CC Geometry, CC Alg. 2, and Financial Math) to foster their skills in literacy and numeracy. Since we are a new school developing our program, we continue to offer tutoring sessions for our students before, during, and after school as well as on Saturday. We feel strongly that the more time we can spend with our students the more instruction and practice time we can offer them. Our goal as a school is to create a safe, academically rigorous, and supportive educational community that encourages our students/families to be successful. By working congruently with families, partners, and staff we believe we can cultivate the relationships necessary to build best practices in instruction, effective communication procedures, and strong parental involvement. We envision a constantly growing learning community. 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Seung Yu, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Academy for Software Engineeri School DBN: 02M546 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Seung Yu Title Principal Melanie Mac Assistant Principal Ashley Cameron Parent Coordinator Christine Thelen ENL/Bilingual Teacher Andrea Hernandez Parent Susan Bodok Teacher/Subject Area Kelsey Thomas Teacher/Subject Area Courtney Brown NA Coach Coach Suzanne Zeitlin-Mellor School Counselor Donald Conyers Ana Vasquez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/18/17 9/18/17 9/18/17 9/18/17 9/18/17 9/18/17 9/18/17 9/18/17 NA 9/18/17 9/18/17 9/18/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M546 School Name: Academy for Software Engineering Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Ashley Cameron Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At the beginning of each year, the Language Access Coordinator works with the school secretary, ESL coordinator, and assistant principal to ensure the school has an accurate and up-to-date assessment of parents' language preferences. The LAC and school secretary review Student Emergency Contact cards and create a spreadsheet of the language preferences of parents. The assistant principal reviews the RHLA report on ATS to cross reference with the in-house language preference spreadsheet. The ESL coordinator reviews Home Language Identification Surveys and includes additional preferences in the spreadsheet. Academic advisors facilitate biweekly conversations with each family and any information regarding language preferences is included in the Communication Log. 8  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Bengali Baluchi Chinese any French Mandarin English Polish Russian Spanish American Sign Language Thai Japanese Malinke Wolof 3 2 8 1 36 4 5 270 1 4 142 1 1 1 1 1 .41 .27 1.08 .14 4.87 .86 0 65.66 .22 .65 26.13 0 .22 .14 .14 .14 3 2 10 1 33 4 5 270 1 4 142 1 1 1 1 1 .41 .27 1.35 .14 4.47 .86 .22 64.15 .22 .43 27 .22 .22 .14 .14 .14 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Letter from Principal School Year Calendar 9/18 Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We have templates and begin the translation process in late August in preparation for distribution for September and beyond. 9  AFSE One-Pagers (Mastery-based grading; grading policy, grade specific focus) Family & Student Handbook 9/18 Curriculum Nights & Parent Teacher Conferences 9/26; 11/29-11/30; 3/7-3/8; 5/9 Regents prep and testing schedule 1/12 & 6/1 Report cards and transcript explanations 1/29 & 6/28 PTA & SLT 9/20/18; 9/26/18; 10/17/18; 11/14/18; 12/19/18; 1/16/19; 2/13/19; 3/20/19; 4/18/19; 5/16/18; and 6/20/19 Student Recruitment and Student internship Brochures 9/18 Electronic versions - families can use Google translation We send out a month in advance and beginning of school year. We send out a month in advance We send specific translated versions to designated students We send out a month in advance and beginning of school year. We have already developed our brochures and waiting for translated copies. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide New Student Orientation June prior to beginning of new school year Curriculum Night & College Orientation 9/26/18 & 5/3/19 Parent Teacher Conferences 11/29-11/30 & 3/7-3/8 interpretation service(s)? We have interpreters attend and provide services during the orientation to families Letter and documents translated Interpreters during evening event Letter and documents translated Interpreters during evening event Letter and documents translated PTA & SLT Meetings 9/20/18; 9/26/18; 10/17/18; 11/14/18; 12/19/18; 1/16/19; 2/13/19; 3/20/19; 4/18/19; 5/16/18; and 6/20/19 We use Google translation and looking to have other translation equipment available Weekly Family Email & Phone Messenger Every Monday morning & Friday afternoon Open Houses (Student Recruitment) 9/18/18; 10/18/18; 11/3/18; 11/15/18 Senior Awards Ceremony 6/3/19 Spanish version offered Interpreters available Invitations translated Invitations translated Interpreters available 0  Graduation 6/25/19 Invitations translated Interpreters available 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have pre-drafted emails and telephone messengers that are translated for various emergency situations and updates ready for dissemination in case of emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We have a 3-day summer staff development for all staff where we review expectations and regulations including A-663. We also use all of the Chancellor's Days for review of resources and regulations. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school will provide parents notification regarding available translation and interpretation services at all of our evening events including Curriculum Night, Parent-Teacher Conferences, and through weekly parent email announcements sent by the parent coordinator in the first two months of school (September and October). The school's main office has the following highly visible and accessible to parents upon entry: NYCDOE Welcome Poster, Parents' Bill of Rights, Parents' Guide to Language Access, and the Language ID guide. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school has multiple mechanisms for gathering feedback from parents regarding the quality and availability of translation and interpretation services. In addition to reviewing the annual Learning Environment survey results, the school coordinates with the PTA and SLT to administer an annual anonymous survey to parents via SurveyMonkey. 1  Informal feedback from parents that is gained from face-to-face and over-the-phone conversations with family are documented into the Communication Log, which is monitored by administration. 2 
