 02M605 School Name: HUMANITIES PREPARATORY ACADEMY Principal: JEANNIE FERRARI   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Humanities Preparatory Academy 02M605 310200011605 9-12 School Number (DBN): 351 West 18 th Street New York, NY 10011 212-929-4433 212-929-4445 Phone Number: Fax: Hilda Oquendo hilda@humanitiesprep.org School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 02 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Jeannie Ferrari RajniTibrewala Scott Hopewell Christina Kemp Judith Chang DestenyDeleon KrystalPaulino Robert Michelin District Information Kathy Rehfield-Pelles Superintendent: 335 Adams Street Room 508 Brookyn, NY 11201 KRehfield@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-923-5181 Phone Number: 718-923-5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Affinity FSC: Alenxandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Brooklyn, NY 11201 Room 608 Executive Director’s Office Address: AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: 717-935-5941 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jeannie Ferrari RajniTibrewala Joseph DelValle Hilda Oquendo Judith Chang BazgaTanvir AniyaMoise Christina Kemp Robert Michelin Yris Montero *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/UFT Member/CSA Member/parent   Name GabriellaWeisberg Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/UFT Member/teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement of Humanities Preparatory Academy Section 4: CEP Overview It is our mission to provide a philosophical and practical education for all students, an education that features creativity and inquiry, encourages habitual reading and productivity, as well as self-reflection and original thought. We agree with Socrates that the “unexamined life is not worth living,” and it is our desire to prepare students to live thoughtful and meaningful lives. We are committed to inspiring the love of learning in our students.   This mission can best be accomplished in a school that is a democratic community. As a democratic community, we strive to exemplify the values of democracy: mutual respect, cooperation, empathy, the love of humankind, justice for all, and service to the world. Humanities Preparatory Academy is college preparatory. Our curriculum and pedagogy prepare students for the rigors of college work and motivates them to desire and plan for a higher education. In preparing students for college we believe that we move students toward higher levels of intellectual engagement while they are in high school. It is our mission, as well, at Humanities Preparatory Academy, to provide a haven for students who have previously experienced school as unresponsive to their needs as individuals. We wish for all students to find their voice and to speak knowledgeably and thoughtfully on issues that concern their school, their world. We aid students in this endeavor by personalizing our learning situations, by democratizing and humanizing the school environment, and by creating a “talking culture,” an atmosphere of informal intellectual discourse among students and faculty. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. In order to achieve this mission, we intend: • to restore a true understanding of the First Amendment: that freedom of expression is the highest democratic right and must be therefore taken seriously, and that democracy can only continue if opinions are based on evidence and meaningful thought; • to encourage students to become passionate thinkers, seekers of truth and beauty, advocates for justice; • to create an environment in which individuality is respected and cherished, an environment in which human beings are valued for the content of their character and the quality of their thought; • to address the problem of student cynicism through promoting intellectual behaviors which lead to students’ discovery of their own humanity and the value of human life, human feeling, human culture, human history, and the human endeavor; • to promote an ongoing dialogue about the educational process, and to create an atmosphere of mutual intellectual and artistic endeavor in which students and teachers learn from each other; • to cultivate the natural idealism of youth through promoting and honoring community work, and to acknowledge and engage the vital interdependency of the practical and the philosophical by creating meaningful external learning situations in the community at large; • to advocate for peace and non-violence through an understanding of history, modeling respect and mutual esteem, and actively exploring and promoting alternatives to hurtful conflict in the realms of both interpersonal and political life; • to provide moral alternatives and to help students become morally sensitive people, and to establish the connections between the academic disciplines and moral action, the connections between learning and community, thereby creating a just community in our school; 0  • to employ the best progressive principles of education, to promote emotional as well as intellectual development, and to cultivate the various learning styles and intelligences present in all students. To this effect, we advocate that depth of inquiry, not coverage of material, guide classroom instruction. We ensure that all students are engaged with complex, challenging, meaningful and authentic learning tasks in the following ways: • All courses taught at Humanities Prep are original and designed around rigorous and relevant essential questions that are aligned to Webb and Hess (cognitive rigor matrix and depth of knowledge rubric). Student questions are incorporated into curricula as well. • All curricula are aligned to the NY Performance Standards Consortium’s PBAT Rubrics, which ensure that students meet college level standards in all academic subjects • All 9th grade students take the highly engaging and interactive “Big History” course, which is a science and social studies interdisciplinary course. This course was designed by researchers at the University of Michigan and engages students with a holistic timeline of major events and discoveries from the ancient to the modern world. The course was adapted and revised by Humanities Prep teachers to better meet the needs of our students. • Social Studies courses are anchored around Socratic seminars, debates, reading groups, and peer editing groups which engage all learners • English courses include student-facilitated literary discussions, theater partnerships, peer editing groups and student inquiry groups that examine their own work. All English courses incorporate elements of philosophy and psychology. • In science and math classes, all students help to design original research and conduct experiments and trials • Math classes include computer science and coding skills as a way to integrate math and technology while engaging students One of the most important features of our school is that we do not believe that students (or teachers) can be successful or happy if the school only tries to engage them in skill-building and assessment. Our school seeks to engage the whole child, morally, socially, intellectually, and physically. We believe that school should be a community. Learning and engaging in community should be joyful, vibrant, social, caring and exciting. Furthermore, our student population often suffers from a lack of nutrition, sleep, home stability, abuse, and other emotional traumas. Before a student can succeed academically, it is critical that their physical, emotional and psycho-social needs are taken into account and responded to. We foster community, healing and engagement in the following ways: Core Values • Our school is anchored around 7 core values. They are respect for the intellect, respect for humanity, respect for truth, respect for diversity, commitment to justice, commitment to democracy, and commitment to peace. These values inform how we interact, how we teach, how we handle discipline, and how we build active, caring citizens. These values are communicated to students through orientation, advisory, our restorative justice program, and in academic courses. Alternative Discipline and Restorative Justice • We do not believe in punishment as the only means of discipline. While we suspend for physical violence, nearly all other incidents are processed as a community. We do this through family meetings, social work meetings, mediations, 1  and restorative justice, and “student protocols”. Our suspension rate is around 1%. We have had no fights this year so far. Conflict is seen as an opportunity to build relationships and grow. • Our alternative discipline model, called “Fairness”, is a panel of students and teachers who help the community process norm violations. It allows students to take greater ownership of their actions, and to develop solutions collaboratively with adults. Mindfulness and Stress Reduction • Humanities Prep has a yoga and mindfulness program that all students take. It offers training in stress reduction, focusing, managing difficult feelings, and self-acceptance. Survey research on this program indicates that students are regularly using mindfulness techniques in their daily lives. The surveys also showed that students feel more focused, more relaxed, and more accepting of their bodies after the course. Since many of our students have experienced trauma, this is a very helpful program. Social Work Outreach and Groups • Our social worker runs several groups over the course of a year, including a group for students in foster care, a group for addiction, a group for anger management, a group for women’s leadership, a group for students facing mental illness, and a group for immigrant students. • Our social worker developed a “Big Brother, Big Sister” program within the school. This is a structured way for seniors to mentor new students. This has had a positive impact on all students, but is particularly successful for emotionally disturbed students and students who have experienced trauma. This offers a positive older role model to help them process difficult feelings and make good decisions. • CBO Community of Unity runs two after school boy’s groups, which serve a total of 35 boys (around 15% of our school). The boys groups receive food, counseling, support, attend events together, and receive intensive college guidance. This has been extremely effective for some of our most struggling young men, who now feel empowered and connected. Advisory • Our advisory program features “advisory circle”, which is a student facilitated conversation about issues that are important to the students. Advisory circle is often a chance for students to process social and emotional challenges that they are facing. • Our advisory program is designed to build a supportive group for all students, and to connect those students to a caring adult who can support their progress towards graduation. The advisor is also the primary point person to communicate with families. Arts • We believe that the arts are critical to the well-being and growth of all students. Therefore, we employ a music and art teacher, as well as several after school programs through our arts partners, Art for Progress, Girl Be Heard, React to Film, The Whitney Museum, and the Coffee House. Engaging with exciting ideas • Our academic courses all focus on engaging with exciting ideas and developing passionate thinkers. All courses are framed around essential questions, and consistently ask students to explore high-level questions that involve analysis, 2  synthesis, evaluation and the creation of new ideas. We believe that students are more motivated to learn skills when their minds are engaged in meaningful questions. Orientation Process • Our orientation process is anchored around two themes; the exploration of exciting questions connected to courses that students will be taking, and building community through the seven core values. Vibrant After-School Culture •For many if not most of our students, the school day does not end at 3:20. Prep Central, the student-teacher work hub, is open most evenings until 6:00 p.m. and offers students the opportunity to work on computers, get tutoring, conference and talk informally with teachers. Furthermore, we have several structured after-school programs, including: Robotics (with partner Google), Coffee House Arts Club, Running Club, Film Club, Cooking Club, Math Club, Music Jam, Music Lessons, Girl Be Heard Theater Group, Chess Club, Big Brother/Big Sister, Community of Unity, Student Council, SAT Prep, and more. Athletics are offered building-wide. Community Service and Internships Humanities Prep employs a full-time Community Associate. His primary responsibility is to connect students and families to community opportunities, such as internships, jobs, volunteer positions, and community service. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. In 1997, Humanities Preparatory Academy was designed to address the needs of students who felt voiceless and yearned for deeper and more profound connections to the world around them. Twenty years later, we still serve that very same community of students representing a vast network of neighborhoods, educational backgrounds, cultural backgrounds within New York City and beyond. Twenty percent of our students come to us with IEPs and we serve a transfer student population that comes to use from schools that have been previously unresponsive to their needs. These students come to us frequently disengaged with school and attendance issues. They need prioritized social and emotional support and curriculum and pedagogy that is responsive to their needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Six Elements of Great Schools According to our 2017 School Quality Review, the school is well-developed in the areas of school culture, trust, curriculum, collaboration and supportive environment. Our area of focus was improving the use of ongoing assessments and aligning practices. In order to address the area of focus, we are developing a common writing strategy that will be aligned to all writing assessments and PBAT rubrics. The goal connected to this is discussed below. In terms of progress towards meeting the six elements of great schools, we have made strong progress in collaborative teaching. We have done this by developing the teams that currently operate in the school. The most impressive team has been peer observation. 100% of teachers, including paraprofessionals, are engaged in structured peer observation. We have had a lot of professional development to improve the quality of feedback and the level of trust among team mates. Another area where we have made progress is rigorous instruction. We believe that the peer observation and inquiry team structures have encouraged a deep examination of curricula and subsequent revisions. Our area of focus would be strong family/community ties. We are working to increase the participation of parents and CBOs by better structuring our systems for parent/community outreach, through the help of a new community 3  coordinator and a director of culture. We hope to offer more opportunities for parents to visit the school and become involved in decision making. We also hope to strengthen our relationships with community organizations by having a team of non-pedagogical staff assigned as liaisons to work with our community partners. 4  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M605 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 235 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 6 2 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 2 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 1 School Composition (2017-18) 81.0% % Attendance Rate 74.5% % Reduced Lunch 3.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 61.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 7.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.08 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 80% 15% 71.7% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 38 29 85.4% 6.8% 18.3% 22.1% 7.2% 2.1% 2 0% 3.6 N/A N/A 40% 8% 82.7% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In September 2017, Humanities Prep was honored by being selected as a "Hidden Gem" by the NY Post. Our curriculum was cited as "rewarding exploration rather than rote memorization." We pride ourselves on the tireless work our educators do to create unique and responsive courses for our students. Our school community agrees with the work we have done so far as resulting in a score of 4.04 on the 2016-2017 NYC DOE School Quality guide in the area of rigorous instruction. To that end, we aim to refine our work at preparing students to master the standards put forth in our PBATs, which require extensive writing and independent research. We have studied student work samples through the school year in cycles of inquiry and identified a writing strategy on which to focus our efforts and we believe will be high leverage enough to support the academic success of our most struggling students. Our SLT is fully behind our efforts to support literacy instruction and have set goals in each department aligned to our literacy goals. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all academic teachers will implement the school-wide common writing strategy developed by inquiry teams during the previous school year, as evident in student work samples, classroom observations, and minutes for inquiry team meetings. This will create a common reference point with which to assess student writing. 6 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? This will target all students in 9-12 This first essay will target the 9th grade students 9th grade students September 2018 October 2018 October-January 2019 All teachers through inquiry and department meetings will revise the strategy All teachers through inquiry and department meetings will revise the strategy All teachers through inquiry and department meetings will revise the strategy Principal, Assistant Principal Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will finalize changes and revisions to the writing strategy Teachers will assign first essay using the new strategy. Work samples will be collected and shared with inquiry teams Inquiry teams will make adjustments as needed based on student work data Teachers will receive PD to better evaluate writing needs and develop accommodations, scaffolds and differentiation strategies to serve our SWD, ELL and other high-need subgroups. Teachers October 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We keep our families informed of updates and progress in terms of our curriculum work through monthly SLT meetings, PTA meetings, and through regularly scheduled family nights, parent teacher conferences, and updates through Schoology. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Inquiry planning is built into the schedule. Per session funding is available for inquiry team work that is after school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 7  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, inquiry teams will report back about the success of the new strategy. They will also review student progress on the PBAT readiness rubrics to determine whether or not the strategy is successful. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Student work monitored through Google Docs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our strength as a PBAT school is supporting students as they work through the process of extended writing and independent research. Teachers carefully monitor student strengths and mastery toward goals and skills as they work toward success on their graduation level PBATs. However, according to our School Quality Survey given in 2017, only 66% of our students responded positively that that in most or all of their classes, their teachers notice if they have trouble learning something. We aim to raise this percentage by focusing our efforts on increasing teachers' abilities to understand and implement formative assessment strategies in the classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To incorporate explicit formative checks for understanding into written unit and lesson plans, and to assess their effectiveness through principal observation and student assessments by June 2018. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? In August, teachers will receive PD on formative assessment as it pertains to our ELL, SWD and otherwise high-need populations, and we will generate a list of common practices as a school and by department. Teachers August 2018 Administrative team and lead teachers By September 30th, all teachers will have formative checks for understanding explicitly written into their lesson and unit plans. Teachers September 2018 All teachers By January 2017, principal observations will reflect the consistent use of at least 2 common checks for understanding in all classrooms. All teachers and students 9-12 January 2019 All teachers PTA meetings in November and March will include workshops around understanding their children's assessments and the various ways they can support students' academic growth and development at home. Parents November 2018, March 2019 Administration, Teachers, Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We keep our families informed of updates and progress in terms of our professional development work through monthly SLT meetings, PTA meetings, and through regularly scheduled family nights, parent teacher conferences, and updates through Schoology. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session funds will be allocated to support teacher PD around stronger, more authentic, assessment practices. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 0  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 100% of teachers will have received feedback from administrators on formative assessment through the observation process. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be monitored through administrative observations aligned to the Framework for Teaching and kept in Google docs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school is proud of our most recent School Quality Guide results from the 2018-2019 school year where our school community rated our school between 96-100% positive in all measures within the Collaborative Teachers metric. Our internal polling of teachers indicate that they want us to develop a more strategic use of their time in relation to collaborative team work. We want to build on our recent successes by aligning the school schedule even more closely to our collaborative team goals to maximize their work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will develop a new schools schedule that will maximize common planning time and collaborative team planning by June 2019 for all teachers. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Establish a committee of stakeholders to research best practices for maximizing collaboration, time, resources and Small-group instructions for SWD, ELL and other high-need sub-groups. Administration, teachers November 2018 We will have a working draft of our schedule by Feb. 2017. Administration, teachers October 2018 - February 2019 We will present our draft for feedback from our SLT and PTA by the end of February 2017. SLT and PTA February 2019 Teachers, programmers and administration, UFT Chapter Chair, PTA President. Teachers, programmers and administration, UFT Chapter Chair, PTA President. Teachers, programmers and administration, UFT Chapter Chair, PTA and SLT We will send our schedule to an SBO vote by March 2017. UFT Chapter March 2019 UFT Chapter, Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We keep our families informed of updates and progress in terms of the school schedule through monthly SLT meetings, PTA meetings, and through regularly scheduled family nights, parent teacher conferences, and updates through Schoology. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Session finds will be allocated to support after-school around fine-tuning the schedule drafts. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 3  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January, 2019, internal school polling will indicate that 80% of teachers are satisfied with the adjustments in the school schedule. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Internal school polling collected from teachers and support staff on a Google Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our 2016-2017 School Survey indicates that 100% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have been sustained and coherently focused, rather than short-term and unrelated. We aim to build on this strength by more closely aligning our professional development the needs indicated in our student success data. We will align our professional development to target more precisely students in high needs sub groups. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, teacher unit plans will reflect improved strategies for accommodating and differentiating for students in High needs sub-groups. In order to achieve this goal, administration will develop a robust professional learning plan that reflects the needs of teachers (both requested and observed). Professional learning will focus on inclusion and accommodations. In order to evaluate the effectiveness of our initiative, we will be monitoring unit plans to ensure that teachers have increased their use of UDL strategies for differentiation and scaffolding. Administration will develop a comprehensive PD calendar for teachers that includes month-long topics of relative import. This will enable us to go into greater depth around our school's initiatives for better serving our students. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration and PD committee will develop three umbrella areas of focus under which all professional learning/development will be organized. Teachers October 2018 Administration, SPED team, teachers, PD committee The professional development calendar for the year will be divided into three rotational cycles based on these areas of focus. Teachers October 2018 Administration, SPED team, teachers We will elicit feedback from teachers after each session to adjust for efficacy in our design and implementation. Teachers, administration October 2018 - June 2019 Administration, SPED team, teachers Professional learning will include actionable strategies for engaging and supporting SWD, ELL and other high-need groups. Teachers, administration, students October 2018 - June 2019 Administration, SPED team, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We keep our families informed of updates and progress in terms of the school schedule through monthly SLT meetings, PTA meetings, and through regularly scheduled family nights, parent teacher conferences, and updates through Schoology. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use our PD committee as a human resource to plan and evaluate our goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 6  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, internal school surveys will indicate that 80% teachers feel that the professional development has been closely aligned to increasing their ability to address the needs of high needs student sub group goals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Google surveys, anecdotes, classroom observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to data from our 2016-2017 school survey, parent communication could be improved. While this is always a struggle for a transfer high school with a transient population, we believe that outreach could be more effective. The P.T.A. in particular has remained small in size since the school’s inception. Parents agree that making the PTA meetings more relevant would increase participation. With that in mind, we are working to co-organize parent events that will include time to talk about school related issues. For example, a financial planning night, a student work celebration, and grade specific parent nights. Advisors have also expressed a desire to have more structured time built in to the day to reach out to families. This would make sure that the school’s expectations are clear to parents, and that parents have a chance to express concerns and build a strong relationship with teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will increase parent attendance at P.T.A. meetings by 30% by June of 2019 by increasing advisor communication with parents by mandating monthly phone calls (advisor to parent to check in). 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Jupiter Grades will reflect a log of monthly parent phone calls by advisor. PTA attendance logs will reflect a 30% increase in attendance Increase advisor-outreach to families of students with disabilities, ELLs and other high-need groups to increase communication and diverse participation on the PTA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All parents of students in grades 9-12 All parents of students in grades 9-12 Parents of SWD, ELLs, and other subgroups September 2018 Teacher-advisors of all students January 2019 Parent coordinator and principal October 2018 - June 2019 Teacher-advisors, parent coordinator, administration If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We keep our families informed of updates and progress in terms of the school initiative through monthly SLT meetings, PTA meetings, and through regularly scheduled family nights, parent teacher conferences, and updates through Schoology. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PTA meetings, staff meeting time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 9  By February of 2019, PTA sign-in sheets and Jupiter Grades call logs will have increased by 20%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PTA sign in sheets will reflect an increase in membership, and, Jupiter Grades call logs will reflect in increase in outreach. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Regents Prep, tutoring and one to one groups Tutoring and one on one groups Tutoring and one on one groups Tutoring and one on one groups Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) IEP status, ELL status, diagnostic and interim assessment, teacher recommendation IEP status, ELL status, diagnostic and interim assessment, teacher recommendation IEP status, ELL status, diagnostic and interim assessment, teacher recommendation IEP status, ELL status, diagnostic and interim assessment, teacher recommendation At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) IEP status, ELL status, diagnostic and interim assessment, teacher recommendation Counseling, tutoring and one on one groups When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Before, during and after school Before, during and after school Before, during and after school Before, during and after school Before, during and after school Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group, one-to-one, tutoring, targeted group assistance, after school academic clubs Small group, one-to-one, tutoring, targeted group assistance, after school academic clubs Small group, one-to-one, tutoring, targeted group assistance, after school academic clubs Small group, one-to-one, tutoring, targeted group assistance, after school academic clubs Small group, one-to-one, tutoring, targeted group assistance, after school academic clubs 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 37 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Counseling, including group and individual, access to books and technology, space to study and work quietly with teacher-guided support, tutoring Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We partner with colleges and universities to attract candidates who believe in our mission and vision as a schools. Additionally, we post vacancies in and outside of our network of essential schools. We work to maintain a positive, collaborative and caring work environment that is contractually sound. We provide deep and enriching professional development to all teachers so that we improve as they grow as educators. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Humanities Prep has four active teams that distribute leadership across the school. These teams each meet for a minimum 4 hours a month (peer observation is more time consuming). Teams are also motivated to meet outside of school hours (although this is not mandated). Here is a description of each team and their impact. The four teams, especially department and inquiry teams, consistently check curricula and assessments to ensure CCLS alignment. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. We are not a TA school 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). We are not a TA school 4  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). We are not an elementary school 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers currently design their own common assessments with principal input. This work generally happens in department and inquiry teams. Assessments are continually refined and all staff have input over how they evolve. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 102,694.00 0 0 0 1,686,673.00 X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 5 Column B Section Reference(s) 5A 5A  advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 6   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Humanities Preparatory Academy , in compliance ESSA, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Humanities Preparatory Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 8  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 9  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Humanities Preparatory Academy , in compliance with ESSA, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 0  Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● designing and supporting curriculum collaboratively; ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by ESSA; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 1  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; 2  ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● Show respect for myself, other people and property; ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn and grow by embodying Humanities Preparatory Academy's core values. 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name Humanities Preparatory Academy Borough Manhattan School Number 605 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jeannie Ferrari Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Maureen Michael Teacher/Subject Area Chin-a Pannacio/Social Studies Teacher/Subject Area Sheri McKnight/English Related-Service Provider Clifford Cohen Superintendent Kathy Pelles Assistant Principal N/A Coach type here School Counselor Jenny Navasky Parent Scott Hopewell Parent Coordinator Hilda Oquendo Field Support Center Staff Member Alexandra Anormaliza Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 4  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 208 Total number of ELLs 7 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.37% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Humanities Prep is a high school. We do use the READ 180 program to assess reading levels for all students. During our orientation process, students meet one on one with our ENL teacher to assess speaking proficiency. Writing samples are also assessed. This information is used in department and inquiry teams to inform curriculum and instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 5  We check to ensure that all ELLs are on track to graduate through credit accumulation, Regents scores, PBAT scores, and interim assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Almost all students score fairly high on these exams across grade levels. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. They are grouped heterogeneously in a push-in environement where they are held to the same high expectations as all students. The ENL teacher offers supports and scaffolds relevent to the needs of the individual students. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? They are delivered based on the student's ELL status as per their NYSESLAT score. This is set at the state and city level and we just follow the rules and ensure that they are given the minutes needed. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Instructional content is aligned with common core learning standards, and pedagogy is aligned with the UDL and the Danielson Framework. Teachers participate in peer observation, inquiry, department and grade teams to improve practice. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The ELL coordinator and special education team oversee this process 6  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We tailor instruction to the individual student's learning style and not only their ELL status. Depending on their status level, students are given more of less scaffolds and autonomy in the classroom. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Differentiated texts based on ELL status, native language and/or reading level, Front loading vocabulary, creating word walls, accessing prior knowledge, using multiple means of expression and representation, paired and group work to facilitate language acquisitions, sentence starters etc. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Teachers push in to ICT classes with ELL-ICT students to support them to reach our expectations. They collaborate with the gen ed teacher to 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We use push-in ELL support, an English skills class that gives targeted literacy support from the ENL teacher, and content area support through collaborative teacher teams (inquiry, dpeartment, peer observation). 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are in the process of hiring another ENL teacher 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs attend and thrive in after school enrichment programs at the same rate as the gen ed population. They are given appropriate supports as needed 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Smart and Promethean board technology, as well as differentiated texts, graphic organizers, choice reading in multiple languages, the READ 180 program 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Translation dictionaries and some dual language texts are offered. Mulitple books in classroom libraries are available in many languages. Several staff members are bilingual Spanish and often use that to support student's literacy development. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We review curriculum collaboratively in teams (including inquiry, department, grade level, and peer observation) 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 7  Smart and Promethean board technology, as well as differentiated texts, graphic organizers, choice reading in multiple languages, the READ 180 program 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). ELLs are so fully integrated into the school and classroom environment that an observer may not notice the difference. However, all ELLs meet with our language support team before they enroll to help us develop appropriate supports. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, our school offers choice language learning through the Rosetta Stone program, as well as a Spanish class. Additionally, some ELLs participate in language classes at Hunter College and Baruch through the College Now program. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We are working with Columbia's Center for Inclusive Education to tailor coaching and differentiation strategies to each subject area during staff meeting time. We are also utilizing the supports from the affinity group. Our Special education teachers are taking ELL support workshops at various colleges throughout the city. Curriculum and instruction are reviewed by teachers and school leadership to ensure that it is rigourous, CCLS aligned, and appropriate to grade level and ELL status. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We are a trasnfer school so most of our students are already in high school. The consortium offers PD throghout the year, as well as the affinity centers and our relationships with outside organizations. Thisis tracked via excel. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The advisor, ELL teacher, and school leaders communicate with families as appropriate. 8  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Records are kept via Jupiter Grades and the I-LOG system, as well as indiviudal teacher records. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jeannie Ferrari, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Humanities Preparatory Academy School DBN: 02M605 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jeannie Ferrari Title Principal N/A Assistant Principal Hilda Oquendo Parent Coordinator Maureen Michael ENL/Bilingual Teacher Yris Guzman Laura Rubin Parent Teacher/Subject Area Sheri McKnight Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Maria Tetzlaff School Counselor Kathy Pelles Alexandra Anormaliza Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 11/17/15 11/17/15 11/17/15 11/17/15 11/17/15 11/17/15 11/17/15 11/17/15 11/17/15 11/17/15 11/17/15 11/17/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M605 School Name: Humanities Preparatory Academy Superintendent: Kathy Pelles The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use the HLS, interviews, ATS reports, as well as data from the student's CUME and blue cards. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language English Spanish 2  French Russian 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All materials mailed home are important and therefore translated 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent teacher conferences, curriculum night, Parent welcome night, Family appreciation night, Financial Aid night, weekly advisor phone calls to parents 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 3  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The annual school learning environment survey as well as in person check ins with families 4 
