 School Name: 75Q009 P.S. 009 Principal: ROBERT WOJNAROWSKI   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P 009Q Walter Reed 307500014009 K-8 School Number (DBN): 75Q009 58-74 57 th Street, Maspeth, NY 11378 718-456-7105 718-456-5977 Phone Number: Alexandra Barilla Fax: Email Address: abarilla@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Robert Wojnarowski Lisa Dunner Donna Lindo Mariela Aguilar na na na District Information Geographical District: 75 Ketler Louissaint Superintendent: 400 First Avenue, New York, NY 10010 Superintendent’s Office Address: klouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1500 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax: Queens North Field Support Center (FSC) Jude Arthur FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 400 1st Avenue, New York, NY 10010 Jarthur2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1604 Phone Number: 718-706-4531 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Robert Wojnarowski Lisa Dunner Donna Lindo N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Shiniqua Bryan Ashwok Almulaiki Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rosalia Petion Marie Noel Jennifer Perez Freddy Alvarado Francisca Gachett Jeremy Ruchames Mariela Aguilar Yvonne Duffus Katherine Wilson Rebecca Rader Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Mission of Our School is to create an environment where learning is a journey towards things yet to be discovered, where learners are encouraged and motivated to enjoy school every day. We create a culture where students feel safe, supported and challenged by their teachers as well as their peers.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P009Q, The Walter Reed School, serves 657 students in grades K-8 at seven locations across three different geographic regions. The Main Site and P 9 at 882 are self-contained buildings; the five remaining sites are located in community school settings. Placement by site is determined by the Principal, Assistant Principals, Pupil Accounting Secretary, School Psychologist, and Counselors. The students are diagnosed with Emotional Disturbance, Autism, Pervasive Developmental Disorder, Global Developmental Delays, Expressive, Receptive Language, Communication Disorder, and Other Health Impairments. All students have Individualized Education Plans which mandate the instructional setting and the necessary supports and services required in order to meet their educational needs. IEP mandates include the following related services: counseling, speech, occupational training, physical therapy, nursing support services, and vision and hearing services. All seven sites offer a full course of study based on the Framework For great Schools. Our core educational goals focus around educating students according to their unique needs to get to the next level of success. While there may be pacing and modifications to accommodate and support the individual needs of students, high standards are set in every classroom. Opportunities for inclusion, integration and mainstreaming are offered at all P.009 sites that are housed within community school settings. Our teachers are committed to the success of our students. We teach our students’ success is intrinsic; therefore every student has the ability to succeed. We see our school as a place where all members of our community are given every accommodation and opportunity for learning, creativity, and participation. We do this through; professional development for staff, surveys, and workshops for parents, and for our students, we have a student government that is elected by student vote. We teach not only academics but Activities for Daily Living skills and social skills needed to foster independence and functionality adults. The school has established collaborative partnerships with external community organizations to enhance students applied learning skills. Examples of these include the Underdonk Museum, Learn to Grow, Maspeth Community Gardens and the Midway Nursing Home. Internal opportunities include student managed and operated enterprises. Heart Cart. Bagel Cafe, Healthy Snack Cart are site based applied learning activities. Establishing partnerships with families to support students’ progress is a priority at P009Q. Our parent coordinator is readily available to any parent/guardian in need of assistance. Newsletters are provided detailing events on the school and district level (health concerns, financial, children’s activities). Parents/guardians are encouraged to participate in activities with their children both during and after school. P009Q has a newspaper where all sites share exciting news/events happening at their site. Each site claims responsibility for notifying parents/guardians of upcoming events. Parents/guardians are invited to share in many special events at P009Q throughout the year. Many students have communication logs in which teachers communicate with parents/guardians both daily and weekly. Teachers also make frequent outreach to families through telephone calls, and translators are utilized when necessary. Daily point sheets to monitor students’ academic and behavior progress are sent home and a 0  parent/guardian signature is required, this is aligned to Power of Choice our school wide behavior modification program. In order to teach students whose functioning levels vary, differentiated instruction and curriculum modifications are made. Differentiation has been supported through professional development focusing on web-based data collection and dissemination towards driving quality instruction. A variety of assistive technology devices are also used to open communication pathways or enhance learning. TEACCH, Picture Symbols and ABA methodologies are used to enhance learning for students with Autism where appropriate. For our students on the spectrum we continue to seek new innovative programs that will allow us to better serve them. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. To meet the needs of the diverse ENL population, we provide an array of services including bilingual and ENL (English as a New Language) instruction using both push-in and pull-out models. For the students at risk of not meeting State standards and/or New York City promotional criteria, Academic Intervention Services are offered during the regular school day. Our P009Q Inquiry Team is focusing on building strategies to support achievement and transition of 8th grade students with an intervention team; while grade intervention teams are established at all sites for all grade levels, the focus is on students who are performing two or more years below grade level. Many students recommended for our program have significant behavioral adjustment problems. A defining essence of the P. 009 Queens culture is the broad array of expertise in resources to address behavioral issues. Our program concentrates on developing both academic skills and social-emotional stability using a school-wide approach solidly grounded in the theories of William Glasser in a curriculum model of Responsibility Education that we call “The Power of Choice.”Staff members have been trained in Reality Therapy, Life Space Crisis Intervention, Therapeutic Crisis Intervention, Anger Management, Applied Behavioral Analysis and Functional Behavior Analysis. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The Walter Reed School is committed to creating a community of unity and acceptance among students, staff, families, and the community in general. Some special school initiatives that demonstrate this commitment includes our Autism Awareness Day. During this event, all of our students, families, and members of the local community come together to celebrate and learn about the uniqueness of autism. This initiative helped to establish and maintain ongoing relationships, rapport, and acceptance for our students on the autism spectrum. Another special initiative includes our multicultural events. This event fosters understanding and acceptance among students, staff, and their families about the various cultures of our student population. Additionally, we received a grant from the Special Olympics which allowed our students to attend a bowling trip to build student confidence and embrace individual abilities in sports and teamwork. 2018-2019 Collaborative Teaching Teams progress -At P009Q, our goal of programming collaborative professional learning community time in every teachers' schedule has been met with 100% implementation. Teachers are now examining authentic student work that aligns to the CCLS and having conversations regarding best practices and student learning. -As per the SBO option of having weekly scheduled professional development time, P009Q has adopted a data informed, comprehensive and need based program of professional development meetings. The meetings are designed to assist staff in understanding the school's vision of success and are supported by administrative observations. 1  -Parent events and parent attendance has increased at all sites. This increase has allowed P009Q to forge impacting and lasting relationships with families that allow the classroom's instruction to better reach the home environment increasing the likeliness that skills are generalized across all environments. -ABLLS-r is an assessment that will be used in conjunction with SANDI/FAST next year to help address the needs of our students with the disability classification of Autism. Coordinating with administration, the alternate assessment coach and teachers, the new assessment was explained through professional development and coaching sessions. This assessment will allow for a comprehensive display of rigor for students with Autism. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75Q009 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,10,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 633 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A 8 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 81.0% % Reduced Lunch 29.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 44.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 10.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 86.0% 0.8% 99.7% 32.9% 11.1% 0.8% 8 3% 9.4 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As evidenced by a review of school and district FAST data spanning 2014-2017, results were as follows: Measurement and Data (MD) 2016-2017: Fall/39 Spring/50 2017-2018: Fall/44 Spring 54 Operations and algebraic thinking (OA) 2016-2017: Fall/42 Spring/52 2017-2018: Fall/46 Spring/63 Reading Informational Text (RI.1) 2016-2017: Fall/58 Spring/72 2017-2018: Fall/55 Spring/66 Reading Informational Text (RI.10) 2016-2017: Fall/49 Spring/61 2017-2018: Fall/46 Spring/57 4  District average by standards (2017-2018): Measurement and Data (MD) Spring: 58 Operations and algebraic thinking (OA) Spring: 68 Reading Informational Text (RI.1) Spring: 77 Reading Informational Text (RI.10) Spring 64 Strengths: -RI.10 And MD (FAST focus areas) represent our greatest strengths which score above the district's average. -As outlined in the Quality Review Report 2016-2017. Quality indicator 1.1 Curriculum-Proficient Students benefit from a curriculum aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards.   Curricula and academic tasks are planned and refined using student work and data.  Students are cognitively engaged in their own learning -Positive school culture is fostered through regular celebration of teacher team achievements in student progress. -100% of teachers in P009Q have collaborative professional learning community time programmed into their schedule. Teachers examine authentic student work and share their practices with one another allowing for best practices to emerge and become adopted by the larger professional learning community. -A school newspaper is designed and distributed by school staff and students to help facilitate information across the 7 sites of P009Q. The newspaper is also used to convey the school's culture and high academic standards. -Data informed professional development has been built into the weekly P009Q schedule. Stating in the 2017-2018 school year, academic data and survey feedback, is used to develop to professional development to best address realized deficits and convey administrative school-wide expectations. Areas in need of improvement: -Based upon the 2018 FAST data, it was determined that teachers needed a rigorous unified curriculum aligned to the CCLS and further support in developing their higher order thinking questioning in English language arts. 5  -Based on data from the 2017-2018 FAST, we did not meet the goal of closing the deficit between district and P009Q in the operational and algebraic thinking and reading informational text categories. After conversation with stakeholders and academic coaches, this is likely attributed to the difference in how prompting levels are scored which inherently yield lower scoring as a result. Also, the ABLLS-r assessment is going to be used in conjunction with the SANDI/FAST to better address baselines for students with the disability classification of Autism. -As outlined in the Quality Review Report 2016-2017. Quality Indicator 1.2 Pedagogy-Developing  Uneven provision of multiple entry points and extensions which limits students’ ability to learn from one  another and maximize academic growth. Inconsistent, pedagogy resulted in some students experiencing rigorous instruction that pushed their thinking while other students did not. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all alternate assessed students grades 3-8 will demonstrate a 3% improvement in the domain of Reading Informational Text, as measured by FAST progress from Spring 2018 through June 2019. . 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Teachers integrate Depth of Knowledge to guide instruction in daily lesson plans by asking higher order thinking questions to foster rigor and student engagement. As evidenced by advance data from teacher observations in 3B. 2. Teachers will incorporate SANDI assessment quarterly data to target skill deficits and inform student groupings in the classroom. As evidenced through posted student groupings, SANDI progress monitoring and effective rating in domain 3D. 3. Use of the District 75 Alternate Assessment Curriculum Framework modules. As evidenced by 2 implemented units of study in math. 4. Professional development involving the understanding and implementation of Depth Of Knowledge higher order questioning and student engagement As evidenced by targeted professional development in domain 3B and monitored by advance data and observation feedback. 5. Inquiry team. 7 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers K-8 with alternate assessed students. All Teachers K-8 with alternate assessed students. All Classroom Teachers with alternate assessed students. 4. All Classroom Teachers 6. All teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Principal and Assistant principal. September 2018-June 2019 Principal/AP September 2018-June 2019 Principal/AP Unit coordinators 4. September 2018-June 2019 5.September 2018-June 2019 Coaches lead teacher 4. Principal/AP, Unit coordinators, Coaches, lead teacher, CTLE committee, Testing coordinator, data specialist, administrative assistant and deans 5. Principal/AP,  5. Weekly Professional Learning Community Inquiry. As evidenced by review of PLC inquiry meeting minutes and data. 7. All classroom teachers and math cluster teachers with alternate students. 6.September 2018-June 2019 7. September 2018-June 2019 Unit coordinators, Coaches, lead teacher, Testing coordinator, data specialist, administrative assistant and deans 8. All classroom teachers with K-2 students with Autism. 8. September 2018-June2019 6. Professional development targeting scaffolding strategies for Students With Disabilities. As evidenced by targeted professional development in domain 3C and monitored by advance data and observation feedback. 7. Equals curriculum will be used for all alternately assessed students to supplemental core curriculum As evidenced by progress monitoring within the Equals curriculum. 8. ABLLS-r will be used for our students on the Autism Spectrum. Assessments will be carried out during Fall and Spring. A correlation chart that aligns SANDI and ABLLS-r will be used to guide classroom instruction. 6. Principal/AP, Unit coordinators, Coaches, lead teacher, CTLE committee, Testing coordinator, data specialist, administrative assistant and deans 7. Principal/AP, Unit coordinators, Coaches, lead teacher, Testing coordinator, data specialist, administrative assistant and deans 8. Alternate assessment coach, unit coordinators, testing coordinator, data specialist, administrative assistant and 8  teachers with students on the Autism spectrum k-2. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. -Teachers will be available to provide support to parents between the hours of 2:20pm and 3:10pm on Parent engagement Tuesdays. Teachers will provide parents with rubrics to develop their understanding of the Common Core Learning Standards expectations and empower them to provide at home support, thereby strengthening the home school connection. -Monthly parent counseling will be conducted monthly to support academic, social and emotional growth for students on the Autism spectrum. These sessions will vary in topics covered and how they are administered. The sessions will be tailored to the needs of the individual parent. -Workshops will be offered to parents in how to read and use rubrics to support their child. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax levy, instructional funding will be used to support continued implementation of two full time school based coaches as well as two unit coordinators to provide direct professional supports aligned to teacher support. Scheduling will provide 50 minutes of professional development on Mondays for staff and 50 minutes of parent training and support on Tuesdays . Teacher support guides for core curriculum, instructional resources and professional literature and materials provided through NYSTL. Funding to provide coverage for external professional developments provided via TL instructional. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, formative assessment data taken by classroom teachers will be examined for progress in meeting the 3% annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 9  The main tool of measurement that will be used is teacher made rubrics that are designed to measure progress aligned to the SANDI/FAST and CCLS. Strategies will be reviewed every three months starting in September 2018. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: -Positive school culture is fostered through regular celebration of teacher team achievements in student progress. -Positive school culture is fostered through regular celebration of teacher team achievements in student progress. -Communication from the principal and administrative team is free flowing. Teachers are encouraged to voice their ideas with the various school leaders and administrators. -Data informed professional development is built into the weekly P009Q schedule. Based on academic data and faculty survey feedback, PD is developed to best address realized deficits and convey administrative school-wide expectations. -Based on the New York City School Survey from 2016-2017, P9Q had 83% positive response to supportive environment aligned to the District and Citywide average of 83%. Area of Need: . Parents, students, and School Leadership Team surveys show that there is a need to focus on improving our school culture and reducing level 3, 4 and 5 behaviors. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1  By June 2019, at each site, collaborative staff teams will implement prevention and intervention strategies (peer mediation, anti-bullying assemblies, Sanford Harmony curriculum lessons) as outlined in the schools De-Escalation plan to help students with behavior management that will result in a decrease of 10% of level 3, 4 and 5 behaviors. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018 through June 2019 Site Administrator All Teachers Dean Classroom Staff PBIS Team Counselors Building an equitable, inclusive and engaging environment that is conducive to student learning: All Student grades K-8 Classroom : We will cultivate student voice and leadership through teaching practices that support social and emotional growth. School : Strategies related to professional learning communities, safe schools, transition planning and orientation programs of all kinds. (Applied Learning Heart Cart-students function in the role of taking food orders from staff., making deliveries, counting money, and taking inventory of stock) Dean: focus on developing self respect, youth development, emotion management skills, and impulsively control in at-risk students. Dean engages in group meetings with selected students, engaging in open discussions about current social issues, classroom issues, ) Theme wide school events give student opportunities to perform on stage in theatre, dance,as well as to play musical instruments. Monthly student events will be implemented along with "school spirit day" each month to expand the current school spirit week. Community : strategies related to community service, partnerships for program support, student leadership, community outreach and student ‐ led projects 3  Develop 2 units of study from the Sandford Harmony social/emotional curriculum 1. Promote consistent use of protocols for prevention, and intervention. 2. Implement Social Skill of the Month, in order to support students taking ownership of their own academic and social emotional learning. Each month will focus on a social/character skills, Chapter 683 will continue with one skill weekly. na 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 12:1+1 & 8:1+1 students grades K-8 with the disability classification of emotional disturbance All Student grades K-8 na September 2018 through June 2019 Teachers with students with the disability classification of emotional disability. September 2018 through June 2019 Dean Classroom Staff PBIS Team Counselors na na How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. During the 2017-2018 school year, Parent Coordinator will facilitate Parent Workshops and student performances conducted throughout the year will include parent participation. The development of our school website will keep parents informed out our school’s programs and activities, as well as provide instructional resources that can be utilized in the home. Site Administrators will monitor events throughout the school term. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds to replenish items for school store. Instructional resources for students to support skills needed to participate in the Heart Cart. TL OTPS will be supplemented by deferred funds rolled over from the 2017-2018 school year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 Deans and site administrators will review BIP progress monitoring data and gather feedback from teachers via survey, indicating if social climate of school/classroom community has improved, resulting in a targeted 10% reduction in level 3, 4 and 5 incidents school-wide in accordance to OORS reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 4  Review BIP progress monitoring data on Level 3, 4 and 5 infractions February 2019 OORS reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Schools Strengths -Positive school culture is fostered through regular celebration of teacher team achievements in student progress. -The school conveys high expectations to students and parents as evidenced by an 85% positive response rate in the school survey. -100% of teachers in P009Q have collaborative professional learning community time programmed into their schedule. Teachers examine authentic student work and share their practices with one another allowing for best practices to emerge and become adopted by the larger professional learning community. -As evidenced by an in-house survey on professional learning community (PLC) practices, teachers and paraprofessionals responded that though they are not as well versed in PLC practices, they are very willing to learn how to collaborate together in teacher teams. -A school newspaper is designed and distributed by school staff and students to help facilitate information across the 7 sites of P009Q. The newspaper is also used to convey the school's culture and high academic standards. -Data informed professional development is used to deliver focused team building activities to strengthen the bonds between faculty on a monthly basis. Areas of Need As evidenced by the school survey (2017-2018), 69% of teachers provided a positive response regarding the working collaboratively section. Part 2 – Annual Goal 6  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will participate in weekly, scheduled professional learning community meetings and create monthly logs that demonstrate rigorous instruction through evidence based practices. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Create Professional Learning Community in Outlook 365 for all P9 teachers to have a common area to share ideas and practices. P9QPLC. All Teachers and paraprofessionals September 2018-June 2019 IEP Team- All Teachers and paraprofessionals September2018-June 2019 Principal, Lead Teachers, Assistant Principals, AA/SA Coaches, IEP Coordinators, paraprofessionals, Principal, Assistant Principals, IEP Coordinator District Coach, IEP coordinators, unit coordinators.  Meet monthly to discuss IEP best practices.  Examine and review randomly selected IEPs for quality and effectiveness by IEP coordinators at each site. Collaborative Teaching Team-  Meet weekly during common preparation periods designed by administration to allow for similar teacher groupings to share effective practices and instructional strategies.  Attend grade level/class ratio meetings to examine student work, talk about differentiating lessons, and making adaptations to meet the individual needs of students. Identify students who are struggling in classes and the interventions needed to support their progress.  Professional development regarding professional learning communities, collaborative teaching and inquiry wiil be developed and administered during selected weekly PD dates. Evidence of PD effectiveness in teacher participation in professional community will be provided by 4d: participating in the professional community. All Teachers/All paraprofessional September2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals 8  Collaborative Teaching Team- All Teachers/All paraprofessional September2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, coaches, lead teachers, unit coordinators,  Meet weekly during common preparation periods designed by administration to allow for similar teacher groupings to share effective practices and instructional strategies.  Attend grade level/class ratio meetings to examine student work, talk about differentiating lessons, and making adaptations to meet the individual needs of students. Identify students who are struggling in classes and the interventions needed to support their progress.  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. -SBO voted in to change school day to support Parent engagement activities on Tuesdays. IEP site coordinators will facilitate bi- monthly workshops to provide IEP support for parents. -Teacher-parent collaboration logs will be maintained within SESIS as events and weekly communication will be expected between teachers and parents. -Quality of IEP meeting survey will be given to parents to assist in facilitating highly productive IEP meetings. -Parent outreach is held at minimum once a week. Parents and teachers communicate as freely as need be utilizing tools such as School Messenger (an educational social media platform), DOE email, daily communication logs, phone calls and meeting. -A dance class styled after Zumba instruction is held weekly at 882 with parent and school staff participation. The class has received positive feedback from both parents and school staff. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Additional funding necessary for professional development and training of teacher team leaders Allowable funds will be used to support professional development of teachers and paraprofessionals by consultants when available. OTPS for material will be provided via funds deferred from te 17/18 school year to the 18/19 Galaxy. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 9  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, 50% of P009 staff will have accessed the P009 PLC Office 365 Sharepoint page  By February 2019, 100% of P009 teachers will have weekly scheduled PLC time to collaborate  By February 2019, 50% of P009 teacher teams will have developed a log with meeting minutes for their PLC time.  By February 2019, 5 ieps from each site will randomly be selected and annotated by each site's IEP coordinator and their selected iep review team.  By February 2019, 100% of teachers will be rated effective/highly effective in domain 4d: participating in the professional community. The Principal and Assistant Principals will met approximately twice monthly with each collaborative learning team to discuss student progress and participate in discussion about student data, instruction, intervention and assessments. As the year progresses administrators and lead teachers will identify agenda items that need to be addressed regularly at meetings, including a progress check on students targeted for intervention. The Principal and Assistant Principals will facilitate regularly scheduled leadership team meetings to guide school improvement process and share leadership responsibilities. Strategies implemented will be reviewed mid-December. Schedule Professional Development sessions during the Monday PD hours. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February 2019, teachers will review student data to assess how many students met the mid-point Benchmarks . Teachers will complete a survey to determine teacher needs in professional growth. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Schools Strengths -According to the 2015-2016 NYC School Survey report the school receives a favorable response parents(91%) and students (89%) in the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools. -Under the Effective School Leadership, poll results show (16-17) that 84% of our parent feel the principal/school leaders encourage feedback from parents/guardians and the community through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders, 93% felt principal and school leaders promote family and community involvement in the school. -Principal communicates freely with faculty via scheduled meetings, email, phone conference and informal conversations. An open door policy is used when appropriate. -Teachers are encouraged to provide feedback during regularly scheduled and anonymous surveys. -Information from teacher teams in communicated to unit coordinators and assistant principals which is then used to influence school policy, academic concerns and expectations. Area of Need Principal communicates a clear vision for this school-69% agreed Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 a survey designed for teaching teams will indicate an overall 5% increase in positive responses which pertain to understanding how to implement the school's vision. The questionnaire will be modeled after the Effective Leadership component of NYC School Survey. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Design a questionnaire to gage Professional Development interest for Monday PD reviewed on a monthly basis All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Data Specialist, Principal, Assistant principals. Teachers/Paraprofessionals September 2018-June 2019 All Teachers/Paraprofessionals September 2018-June 2019 Principal /Assistant Principals Unit Coordinators Principal /Assistant Principals School Based Coaches Administrators and school staff will collaborate to create a professional development team for the purpose of designing meaningful instructional support of the 2018-2019 school term Administrators and school coaches will collaborate with teaching teams to develop teacher selected professional development to improve overall pedagogy based on Chancellor's Framework for Great School and target implementation of new instructional programs and teaching methodologies 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. -Parent outreach is held at minimum once a week. Parents and teachers communicate as freely as need be utilizing tools such as School Messenger (an educational social media platform), DOE email, daily communication logs, phone calls and meeting. A dance class styled after Zumba instruction is held weekly with parent and school staff participation. The class has received positive feedback from both parents and school staff. -Throughout the 2018-2019 School Year beginning in September Principal and Assistant Principals will focus on communicating to parents their role as stakeholders and provide them with an understanding of the school's decision making process through parent workshops, parent feedback forms (to be distributed during parent/teacher conferences), Parent Newsletters, as well as defining the role of the School Leadership Team. Parents will be invited to participate as observers during SLT meetings. Teachers will establish open communication beginning in September 2018 by sending home introductory letters outlining key elements such as: 1- curriculum and instruction 2  2-home work policy 3-grading policy 4-contact information -P9 will create a Parent Corner on our school website to keep parents informed an up to date on activities and important events taking place during the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional Materials and Resources . Fund activities that promote school culture and collaboration Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Review ongoing surveys and staff participation to review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments as necessary Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February 2019,review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan if applicable. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the School Snapshot for 2014-2015, 85% of Parents say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how the staff can help their children learn. Our goal is to continue to support parent engagement and increase parent participation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, we will increase parent participation and engagement by 5% as evidenced by an increase in parent attendance at school functions and activities. Data will be collected and reviewed mid-year. By June of 2019, parent attendance data at workshops and school events will increase by 5%. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Using an attendance monitoring signature method to track attendance, at least 10% of parents will participate in monthly activities that foster partnerships with the school to promote student learning, provide information and resources regarding student academic and emotional health, in order to increase the percentage of parents that report that they have been invited to an event at their child’s school (including workshops, classes, performances, trips, and volunteer opportunities) Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents September 2018-June 2019 Administration Parent Coordinator Workshops and information for parents of ENLs and Students with disabilities with a focus on assisting parents on how to support their child at home. Parents Professional development for teachers on how to communicate and outreach effectively with parents to increase parent involvement. Parents Teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 na 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration Parent Coordinator Lead teachers School Based Coaches Guidance Counselors If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. P9 will continue working with the following CBO's during 2018-2019 school term; Jamaica Farmers Market-students learn about agriculture, healthy eating and entrepreneurship. Ridgewood Underdunk House (teen project targeting at risk teens) Good Dog Foundation -(dogs visits school sites students learn about animal care) Midway Nursing Home-(students visit nursing homes gaining experience working with residence) Jamaica Multi-Cultural Center-(student learn about their community) 5  Pollination Project (planting vegetables with student and parents) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tuesday parent engagement planning time. Parent Workshops can be held after students are dismissed. Related Service staff will plan thematic workshops focusing on academics, social skills, transition etc. Workshops will be selected by a parent assessment inventory. STH funding will provide per session for extended hours for academic intervention and library book exchange programs. Professional development for parents of ELLS will be funded by TITLE III funding for per session and materials and supplies Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 - 5% of parents should have attended at least two events in our school as evidenced by parent attendance sign in sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February 2019, SLT members will analyze attendance data from the previous school year and this year to determine if there has been an increase in the number of families participating in school sponsored events. Tools Utilized: -Parent attendance sign in sheets -Participation percentage in NYC school Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Performance Series scores Over 50% of all students arescoring below level 3 on ELA exams Mathematics Performance series scores Over 50% of all students arescoringbelow level 3 on Math exams Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Great Leaps Handwriting Without Tears Leap Frog Step Up to Writing Wilson Quick Reads Technology: (Storybook Weaver, Apple Works, Microsoft Word, Kids Inspiration Go Math Achieve It Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Paraprofessional- one-to-one instruction During the school day Small group Paraprofessional- one-to-one instruction During the school day Math Steps Small group Great Leaps Math Technology: (Sampson Classroom, Cornerstone, Jumpstart, Math Rabbit, Millie’s Math House 7  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students in Grades 4 and 8 are scoring below level 3 on Science Exam Teacher observation, rubrics indicate students are struggling with Social Studies units OORS data Level 3 and above infractions IEP Mandates Counseling Glencoe Science Reading Essentials Achieve Maximum Potential (AMP) reading system Rewards Plus Paraprofessional- one-to-one instruction During the school day Small group Paraprofessional- one-to-one instruction During the school day Small group Small group One-to-one During the school day Crisis intervention provided as needed Anti-bullying events Classroom visits Peer mediation sessions 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) na 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. na Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). n/a Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 1  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 009, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 009 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 4  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 5  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 009, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 6  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 7  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 8  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 9  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 0  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 12 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 1 1 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: In 2018-2019 school year, the ELL population at P. 009 Queens Main Site is distributed across grade levels Kindergarten through Eighth Grade. Because of the broad distribution of ELLs throughout grade levels, we use a Stand-Alone and Integrated ENL Program with two types of class ratios: 12:1:1 and 8:1:1. ENL instruction is provided to ELLs with the following disabilities: Autism, Emotional Disability, Intellectual Disability, and Multiple Disabilities. ENL instruction is provided in accordance with IEP mandates, and NYSESLAT proficiency levels in order to accommodate individual student or group needs. P. 009 Queens Main Site student body is comprised mostly of ELL students having Spanish as their native language. There are a number of students that have other native languages such as: Bengali, Chinese, Mandarin, and Punjabi. For the current school year (2018-2019) there is a total of 71 ELL students at the Main Site: two-thirds of the students are alternately assessed. A licensed ENL instructor provides the service in consultation with the classroom teacher to effectively execute common core curriculum in the content areas. Instruction is also differentiated for standardized and alternate assessment students. Assessments employed for the alternate assessment students incorporate NYSAA, SANDI, and FAST. Instruction for both standardized and alternate assessment students is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Instructional materials are supplemented with bilingual libraries and software to enhance instruction, and make it more accessible to students. For the Title III afterschool program, P.009 Queens will focus on 12 ELL students (Grades 6-8) from the Main Site. Test data results indicate that the participating students have a Score of (Entering) on their 2018 NYSESLAT test scores. The Title III Afterschool American Civics Program will give the students the opportunity to improve their NYSESLAT scores to Emerging or Transitioning as well as help them academically in their regular classes through supplemental thematic units which will concentrate on American Civics. The staff of the Title III Afterschool American Civics Program will consist of one certified ENL teacher (Ms. Alana Kupersmith), one paraprofessional, and a Supervisor (whose hours end at 3:20 p.m., and will be remunerated by Title III funding from 3:30 PM to 5:30 PM in order to facilitate student activities, dismissal and student/parent engagement. Instruction for the Title III Program will be in English by the ENL teacher using Common Core Learning Standards and New Language Arts Progressions and methodologies including: Whole Language, Total Physical Response, and the Language Experience Approach. Strategies such as the use of graphic 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information organizers, text re-presentation, bridging, and contextualization will ensure the success of the methodologies employed. The participating students will be comprised of one group of 12 children in a 12:1:1 ratio. The Title III Instructional Program will take place on selected Wednesdays and Thursdays beginning February 6, 2019 through June 13, 2019. The classes will be three hours in length from 2:30 PM to 5:30 PM for a total of 34 sessions exclusive of holidays. The Title III Afterschool American Civics Instructional Program will be conducted via thematic units which will include: American government structure, practices, and ceremonies. We will utilize the Internet, Ipads, online archived government ceremonies, a variety of books, and government issued pamphlets, magazines, and newspapers. Laptops are an extremely effective learning tool and will be used extensively in this Program. In this Title III Afterschool American Civics proposal we are using Ipads to access the Internet to accomplish our research objectives. The learning experiences will include the American electoral process, citizenship, and ceremonial traditions. Title III instruction is in alignment to bilingual progressions and common core learning standards. We will emphasize developing writing skills based upon the Common Core Learning Standards for Grades 6-8: organize an event sequence that unfolds naturally and logically; utilization of narrative techniques such as dialogue, pacing, and description; use a variety of transition words and phrases; use of precise words and phrases; language to convey experiences and events; and, provide conclusions from described narrated events.This instruction will offer multi-benefits by integrating: reading, writing, technology, and the combination of ELA and Social Studies disciplines. These instructional practices will positively increase the ELLs acquisition of the English language. The purpose of using the thematic Civic units is for the ELLs to build self-esteem, critical thinking skills, social and cognitive development, promote discourse with oral language practices, oral and written presentation skills, added fluency in reading comprehension, gain confidence and independence, have hands-on experiences, and enhance multicultural understanding. As part of the Title III Afterschool Civics Program, the participants will be immersed in project-based learning, resulting in a final project focusing on civics and government primarily utilizing laptops for research. The final culminating activity will be a chance for the students to showcase their work to the whole school population. The Title III participating students will be assessed in the following ways: rubrics, videotaping, oral and written presentations, and teacher observations. Supervision will be under the P. 009 Queens administration, but will when necessary be supervised by an administrator from the Middle School After School Program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Title III staff (Supervisor and A. Kupersmith, ENL Teacher) will conduct fourteen sessions of professional development on Title III topics for staff members on the first Tuesday of each new month for one hour between 3:30 PM to 4:30 PM. The paraprofessional assigned to Title III will also be in attendance and a participant in the professional development discussions. The rationale 3  Part C: Professional Development for these professional development sessions is to define the academic needs of the ELLs in the Title III program as they relate to the instruction of our theme: American Civics. The ENL teacher will continually collaborate with her classroom teacher colleagues as a bridge in order to communicate how the Title III after school program will increase students' ability to access classroom instruction. The professional development sessions will also review our projected research into the following topics: the branches of government; the responsibilities of each branch; the role that individuals within each branch play. As part of the Title III Professional Development, the ENL teacher will ensure that the paraprofessional, as well as the administrator are aware of the CCLS elements that are addressed in order to accomplish the goals of learning about the function of each government branch, while being able to increase students' writing abilities. Effective utilization of research tools including laptops research, review of ENL and related common core standards, and how to assess students' progress in the classroom through the use of teacher-made materials and rubrics will be part of the professional development provided. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Communication with families of the students serviced through Title III funds will be ongoing throughout the school year. Parental involvement will include workshops, and the opportunity to participate in the Title III Program. Parents and siblings of the Title III ELL students will be invited to attend the workshops. Language interpretation services will be provided via the Bilingual Spanish paraprofessional. The paraprofessional providing language interpretation to parents of ELLs will also be employed as the paraprofessional during Title III Program, offering interpretive services in Spanish. Translated Title III letters, memorandums, and brochures will be sent home to parents via the U.S. Postal Service, as well as in backpacks. Staff is available for translation services, if necessary, and all communication will be translated for families for whom English is not the primary language in the home. The parent coordinator (Yolanda Jones) will develop resources as well as provide workshops during the school year targeting the families of ELL students. Many of our ELL parents are unfamiliar with the workings of agencies which can assist them with transition. Since the workshops entail practical applications for daily living, we believe our ELL parents will begin to have an understanding how our government/social agencies work. The workshops will be scheduled on selected dates, one Tuesday per month from 2:30 pm TO 3:30 pm, starting in February through the school year and will be done by the Parent Coordinator at no additional cost to Title III funds. The planned workshops will include the following topics: information regarding the Office of People with Developmental Disabilities; discussions regarding guardianship and its relationship to investments and associated legal issues; clinical evaluations with the Office of People With Developmental Disabilities; Day Treatment information; and teaching teen boys and girls hygiene. Parents will also be invited to participate with the students on any Wednesday or Thursday of the Title III program. This will give them exposure to the topics of discussion regarding American Civics. The parental involvement will 4 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities also serve as a bond between parent and teacher. In addition, parents will be given metrocards based on their needs. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem $14254.80 $2375.80 Subtotal: $16630.60 Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $4751.00 $250. $250 23,758 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Direct Instruction: 1 Supervisor X 34 sessions X 2h X $63.45 = $4314.6 1 Teacher X 34 sessions X 3 hours X $60.65 = $6186.30. 1 Paraprofessional X 34 sessions X 3 hours X $34.73 = $3544.5 Professional Development: 1 Supervisor X 14 sessions X 1h X $63.45 = $888.30 1 Teacher X 14 sessions X 1h x $60.65 = $849.10 1 Paraprofessional X 14 sessions X 1h X $34.73= $486.22 3 THINKPAD T470s G LAPTOP X 1,583.66=4751. 5  6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name Walter Reed School Borough Queens School Number 009 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Robert Wojnarowski Coach Leslie Liberman ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Caba Heldt Kupersmith Teacher/Subject Area N. Cabrera Teacher/Subject Area E. Rizzo Related-Service Provider Superintendent Ketler Louissant Assistant Principal Janet Brozyna-Lee Coach Katherine Wilson School Counselor Ana Mariano, Bilingual SW Parent Denise Vecchio Parent Coordinator Yolanda Jones Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 639 7 Total number of ELLs 177 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 27.70%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The school utilizes several early assessment literacy tools to determine the skills of our students. Early literacy skill assessments include the NYC Performance Tasks, Fountas and Pinnell, and teacher-created performance tasks. Results are shared between the classroom teachers and the ENL Teachers to serve as a guide for instruction. Since most of our ENL students are alternate assessment, they need intense instructional development in all academic areas. Since 26% of our ELLS are in Grades K-2 - the early literacy skill assessments are crucial to their ENL instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? ENL Teachers review all student assessments with each other, classroom teachers, and speech providers when applicable. Turning five students take priority as communication within the classroom and school building are essential to student well being and are assessed by classroom teachers, speech providers and ENL Teachers. Collaboration with classroom teachers begin as new students are registered. Team teaching lessons are planned and in practice. Teacher Teams have been 8  established with ENL, Speech and classroom teachers to plan additional support to nonverbal students. Parents are consulted to determine student's language abilities at home in their native language. Parent support groups have been established by both ENL and counselors and parents have been attending Family Engagement sessions. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In addition to ENL teacher made materials that measure progress along with classroom indicators , there are several assessments and exams that give us quantitative results pinpointing the success and continued development of our ENL program. We review SANDI, NYSAA, Performance Series, Previous NYSESLAT scores, New York State ELA, Math, & Science Tests, report card grades, and updated progress on the measurable annual goals found on IEPs in SESIS. Quantitative results: NYS ELA Tests - Level 1 across all grades; NYSAA ELA Test results: Level 1 = 1%, Level 2 = 7%, Level 3 = 86%, Level 4 = 6%. NYS MATH Test results - Level 1 across all grades: NYSAA MATH Test results: Level 1 = 1%, Level 2 = 5%, Level 3 = 86%, Level 4 = 8%. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ENL Teachers collaborate to review assessments and plan strategies to support individual and smaller group needs. Teacher team meetings have identified areas of additional need in non verbal turning five students. Collaboration with related service providers and special subject teachers further support language acquisition. Applied learning activities, school culture events throughout the year offer more opportunities for language acquisition. All staff verbally interact with students when appropriate. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] A teacher created language acquisition and comprehension rubric will be used to document and analyse student progress. Portfolios are created with student work to document and share progress with parents. Monthly conferences with classroom teachers to report progress. The RTI framework outlined on Page 66 of the ELL Policy and Reference Guide are the steps we use to help students achieve their academic goals. Teachers are attending relevant professional development session (visual arts, science, teacher collaboration and assessment) and turn keying information. At risk ELLS are encouraged to use their language in small groups or partner work to express social and emotional issues. Teachers share relevant information as students move from one level to another or one site to another. ENL Teachers are involved in supporting upper grade social interaction and public speaking such as Graduation, school performances and school culture events. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The primary assessment used to determine the level of our students is the NYSESLAT exams which reveal that % of our students are at the Entering Stage. A high percentage of our students do not pass the the NYSITELL Test do not pass and is clearly at the Entering Level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Frequent ENL Teacher meetings allow for constant communication which addressed student progress and major changes in data results. Progress is analyzed and instructional methodologies are shared based on students with similar academic needs.This allows for alterations being easily made to the program when necessary. Part IV: ELL Programming 9  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our program is currently ENL: Integrated and Stand-Alone as mandated by CR Part 154 during which a NYS certified ENL teacher with a classroom or content area teacher are providing core instruction. The program model currently used within the Integrated model is heterogeneous, where students of mixed English proficiency levels are provided ENL instruction in the classroom setting. Our Stand Alone model is homogeneous, where students of the same performance levels are provided ENL instruction. Utilizing both integrated and Stand alone organizational models students in ENL are taught in English using ENL methodologies and native language supports for the specified amount of time as determined by their ENL levels. Students are served the maximum number of CR Part 154 mandated units of study within the constraints of staffing a mufti-sited school organization. b. TBE program. If applicable. P.009Q currently features ENL program. c. DL program. If applicable. P.009Q currently features ENL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We adhere to the instructional ENL required units of instruction outlined in the charts below. Due to the staffing constraints, the ELL students receive the maximum of instructional minutes possible. ENL Teachers work closely with each other and Administration to maximize their time throughout the sites. The five Proficiency Levels are: Beginner/ Entering = 360 Minutes; Low Intermediate/Emerging = 360 Minutes; Intermediate/Transitioning = 180 Minutes; Advanced/Expanding = 180 Minutes; and Proficient/Commanding = 90 Minutes Students are served the maximum number of CR Part 154 mandated units of study within the constraints of staffing a multi-sited school organization. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our instructional strategies are tailored to meet our student needs. We provide content-area instruction in English using ENL methodology and instructional strategies, as well as using native language support to make content comprehensible. Instruction incorporates ENL strategic instruction using problem solving, picture symbols (Mayer Johnson), speech assistance devices, challenging content, project-based and communicative-based learning. When using Common Core Learning Standards elements we focus on modeling, bridging, contextualizing, text assessment and understanding, and using content to analyze and answer questions effectively. ENL teachers use the same texts used in the classroom working with Common Core Learning Standards guidelines. For standardized assessment students, Go Math, Impact Math, Periodic Assessments including the Performance Series and Benchmark Tests are utilized for instruction and evaluation of student needs. Alternate Assessment 0  students use Sandi and NYSAA as assessment tools and a host of appropriate books, websites, and teacher prepared assessments to develop and nurture our ELLS. Our program is designed to assist ELLs in achieving proficiency for their grade level and meet or exceed New York State standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our ELL students are currently only evaluated in English. Teachers employ adapted materials and instructional techniques including pictures, symbols, games and role playing to assess comprehension. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Our SIFE students are provided instruction in English to acquire basic concept knowledge, critical thinking techniques, and English language proficiency utilizing content that reflects age and cultural interest. Services include Integrated instruction for class ELA instruction/school projects and performances, library, technology lab, and stand alone instruction used to support individual needs. b. Newcomers are provided services that immediately respond to their social, cultural, and linguistic needs. Students may benefit from more Stand Alone instruction at this time as these groups are more homogeneously grouped. Integrated instruction will also help to support individual needs during ELA lessons to support vocabulary acquisition. c. In the Developing stage we provide both Integrated and Stand Alone instruction in most content areas as well as school culture, and events. Our Title III program also provides more opportunity for social interaction in a smaller setting. d. Long Term instruction for our ELLs includes both Integrated and Stand alone instruction as appropriate for our varied population. This may require more rigorous instruction as language proficiency increases as well as maintaining the strong level of basic ELA support possibly including adaptive devices, symbols, etc. e. Former ELLS are students who reach the proficient/commanding level and are entitled to at least a half unit of integrated ENL for two years are included in all school programs. Intervention services for ELLs receiving extension of services consist of Title III Program, integration in all school projects within the school and in the community, extra library access and support scheduling. In addition we use many interactive computer programs to increase fluency, reading and comprehension as well as widespread use of interactive tech boards and communication boards that use Mayer Johnson symbols. Parents are encouraged to use English when interacting with their children during daily activities. Parents are invited to al school activities. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Due to the special needs of our students, teachers utilize a variety of instructional programs. Units of ENL instruction offer instruction in listening, reading, writing and speaking English, while others utilize ENL methodologies to develop and strengthen cognitive skills. Lessons used for instruction are: teacher created/adapted materials, relevant interactive web sites, and the integration of classroom instructional curriculum which may include Go Math, Ready Gen and Attainment. ELLs are taught in collaboration with both the ENL teacher and the classroom teacher. All instructional materials used are age and grade appropriate and curriculum based and supported. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Teachers collaborate to create lessons based on appropriate curriculum for each class. Lessons include teacher created/adapted materials, relevant interactive web sites, and the integration of classroom instructional curriculum which may 1  include Go Math, Ready Gen and Attainment, Passport to Social Studies, etc. Using Integrated instruction our ELLs are taught in collaboration with both the ENL teacher, the classroom teacher and Alternate Placement Paraprofessional. All instructional materials used are age and grade appropriate and curriculum based and supported. Flexibility in instruction and scheduling supports the needs of our students including social and behavioral needs. Learning with their peers in the classroom further enhances their instructional opportunities and progress. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We have tailored our intervention instructional programs to meet our students' needs. Instruction is provided in English in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies with paraprofessional support. Languages are Spanish, Russian, Chinese, Polish, Arabic, Urdu, Punjabi and Bengali. Our alternate placement paraprofessionals, under the guidance, supervision and direction of the teacher, support our students through translation and interpretation. Intervention instruction encompasses picture symbols, modeling, bridging, contextualizing, interactive tech devices. Our intervention instructional strategies are tailored to meet our student needs. Instruction is provided in English and the Native Language when needed in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies. The languages are Spanish, Chinese, Polish, Russian, Bengali, Arabic, Punjabi, and Urdu. The alternate placement paraprofessional under the guidance, supervision, and direction of the ENL teacher, supports instruction in their native language if bilingual instruction has been indicated. of the common core curriculum topics. Intervention instruction encompasses picture symbols, assistive devices, modeling, bridging, contextualizing, and the latest common core curriculum standards. ENL teachers use the same texts employed in the classrooms. Our students use Go Math, Sandi, and NYC Performance Tests to measure performance. The ENL teachers incorporate real life situations and equate that to the learning experience. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In addition to SANDI FAST, NYC Performance Tasks, State assessments, and Fountas and Pinnel our current Curriculum choices include assessments that are detailed in their data collection and progress monitoring, allowing teachers to align instruction to support particular skills for individual students. Teachers are using the interactive lessons and supplements that are built into the curriculum, providing even more opportunities for data collection and progress monitoring. Teachers have also been trained in the use of interactive boards and are able to create interactive lessons for students. We will continue to utilize additional technology applications including the use of Interactive boards and Ipads for Scholastic Magazines and NEWS 2U, as well as symbol and picture representations. Many of our students also have behavioral issues and in order to help them we use Life Space Crisis Intervention and other behavior management programs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Our school currently features ENL program only. There will be no discontinued services at this time. All of our programs are in place as well as additional assessments. ENL students are being served per their IEP's. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are offered the same opportunity of equal access to all school programs. ENL teacher(s) at the elementary and middle school levels collaborate and team teach with both classroom and cluster teachers. When available, ELLs will be able to attend both Title III and After School programs. These extra programs offer a reinforcement to the daily instructional program and also serve as a social learning tool for collaboration and understanding among students. Our ELL students participate in all extra curricular activities along with their peers. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Due to the individual needs of our students teachers utilize a variety of instructional strategies and materials. Teacher(s) provide instruction in ENL and content area instruction in English is supported by ENL methodologies. Technology used by ELLs include computer lab access, interactive tech board usage, and ELA Internet sites and programs. During instruction, teachers take into account the primary language and culture of the student while giving consideration to and teaching to the cognitive 2  ability of the child. Instruction and methodologies vary based on the student's cognitive ability and his/her level of English proficiency. Some units of instruction in ENL provide instruction in reading, writing, listening, and speaking English while others utilize ENL methodologies that develop cognitive skills. For some students ENL Teachers use picture symbols and speech devices. The ENL teacher(s) use a variety of books, workbooks, magazines, periodicals, and visual cues that help our ELLs learn different subject matter. These materials are Common Core Curriculum based and enhance and foster positive learning outcomes. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our ENL Program, in order to shelter the home language and support the new language acquisition, home language support is provided by our alternate assessment paraprofessionals in our ENL Program. ENL Teachers, classroom and cluster teachers utilize alternate placement paraprofessionals to provide interpretive services to our ELLs. ENL teacher(s) and alternate placement paraprofessionals use many different media forms to teach and deliver curriculum goals. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. In addition to ENL support, classroom staff assess students' abilities using adapted curriculum assessments and teacher made materials including symbols and pictures. Students are assessed during various academic and social situations by staff members to gain the best evaluation of the ELLs ability to communicate in any modality. After reviewing assessments, age appropriate and grade level instruction are supported through IEP goals. Parents are contacted frequently to share information and report progress. All services and resources correspond to ELL's ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our ELL students are included with our non ELL students in every activity at our co-located sites. With the collaboration of ENL teachers, classroom teacher and related service providers, our ELL students are integrated during bussing, breakfast, lunch, Physical Education, Inclusion Programs as well as Arts performances, Science Fairs, etc. Our ELLS are included in community projects, District programs and Positive Behavior Support trips and activities. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). During the intake process, families are taken on a tour of the building to introduce the student and family to cafeteria, gym, special subject rooms, such as Music, Tech and Applied Learning, Art and Science where applicable. Families may be introduced to staff members including Related Service Providers and Speech Teachers, if applicable. The daily schedule is explained with opportunities for questions. Breakfast and lunch are discussed (especially for turning five students, or students with special dietary needs. Bus and transportation concerns are addressed with phone numbers of OPT, etc. given to the family. Parents are encouraged to express any concerns. If the family chooses to have their child attend Chapter 683, the student would then be involved in a more relaxed school (camp-like) setting providing a less formal introduction to our program. The curriculum in the summer allows for more informal school wide and outdoor activities with individual class and group activities providing opportunities for socialization and making friends. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently no language electives are offered to students, including ELL students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 3  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Currently, P.009Q only features ENL program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All staff members at P.009Q including Special Education Teachers, Paraprofessionals, ENL Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Psychologists, Occupational Therapists, Physical Therapists, Speech Providers attend ongoing professional development to assist in the instruction of our ELL students. Professional development will include but is not limited to the following: Focus on the Common Core Learning Standards under the supervision of the school's Standardized Assessment and Alternate Assessment Coaches and District Directives. Curriculum training and support. Concentration on Academic Oral Language and Vocabulary instruction. Jose P. Training (conducted by the District 75). Professional development dates are ongoing and may include online training opportunities. Curriculum use and best practices are presented to staff with opportunities to attend trainings offered by the Publishers and District Office. Small group Teacher Collaborations include the following topics: ELL identification; Effective integration of ELLs instruction in the classroom; Ongoing progress of ELLs in comparison to non ELL peers; Positive Behavior Supports for ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL teachers attend all the instructional professional development sessions offered by the District Office. Their professional development continues in their collaboration with school coaches, classroom teachers and related service providers in the knowledge of the Common Core Learning Standards and Essential Elements for alternately assessed students. The school conducts ongoing professional development sessions throughout the school year. School coaches are an integral part of professional development and have a direct impact on ENL teachers professional growth. Relevant topics to ENL teachers include Common Core Curriculum and its use with ELL students: the utilization of assessments and its relevancy to ELL students; and perfecting teaching techniques including the use of technology in instruction. ENL teachers collaborate with teachers in developing lessons that have been guided by the curriculum. In doing so, they have become more familiar with Go Math, Attainment, Passport to Social Studies and Fourth and Eighth grade Science curriculum and tests. With each of the above, ENL teachers are better able to direct instruction to the Common Core. Professional Development Attendance is maintained in the office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 4  In addition to Parent Orientation, Parent Teacher Conferences, Parent Engagement opportunities and Parent Outreach, communication with parents is an ongoing process in our school. Parents are accommodated when asked to meet with an ENL or classroom teacher and both are made available to discuss student progress. ENL Teachers plan conferences with parents to report progress. The learning goals and lesson objectives are reviewed with the ELL parents throughout the school year. We review the strengths and weaknesses of each student and We elicit the cooperation of our parents to learn information about daily family interactions between students and family members and how they can aid us in the education process. We also maintain a portfolio of work so the parents can see the actual progress their children are making. We provide translation and interpretation services when needed either through staff members who speak the language or the use of the DOE Translation and interpretation Unit. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are continually offered opportunities to participate in activities directed to their families' needs. The Parent Coordinator organizes many interesting and meaningful workshops addressing social and financial questions, through speakers and presentations from appropriate organizations offer opportunities for discussion and support. Support groups and agencies bring information to parents and provide networking and support opportunities. Parents are also invited to fun activities hosted at each off site including exercise, dance and health related topics. In addition, ENL teachers have offered ENL classes to parents during our Parent Engagement sessions. As part of our parent/family engagement plan, our Counselors have instituted parent support meetings/workshops in both English and Spanish. Parents have been attending regularly. Our Library Teacher offers workshops for parents with activities and prizes. Classroom teachers organize cultural celebrations that always include parents who are willing to attend, donate and participate. Invitations to school Multicultural activities, school performances and class activities are translated. Class letters home and parent participation requests are translated in writing and verbally offered. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. New York State test results both for NYSESLAT and ELA/MATH are influenced by the various disabilities found at P9Q. Due to the disabilities many of our ELLs are Alternate Assessment students and will not test due to their inability to take all or part of NYSESLAT or in the case of standardized ELA and MATH tests have difficulty as well. In addition, a high percentage of ELL students are diagnosed in the low cognitive range, non-ambulatory, non verbal, or physically disabled. When administering NYSESLAT all of our ELLs are given the exams. 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Robert Wojnarowski, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Walter Reed School School DBN: 75Q009 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Robert Wojnarowski Title Principal Janet Brozyna-Lee Assistant Principal Yolanda Jones Parent Coordinator Elizabeth Caba ENL/Bilingual Teacher Denise Vecchio Parent Elaine Rizzo Teacher/Subject Area Nancy Cabrera Teacher/Subject Area Leslie Liberman Katherine Wilson Coach Coach Ana Mariano, Bilingual SW School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Rel Service Provider Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 10/11/17 1 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75Q009 School Name: Walter Reed School Superintendent: KetlerLouissai The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yolanda Jones Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parent Information from Part III of the Home language Survey is our primary source document for defining the preferred language to be used for oral and written communication with our parents. Along with the HLIS, we use information supplied by the ATS RPOB Report as well as student profiles found in SESIS. Constant contact between our ENL Teachers and parents is another method we use to find out language preferences. This supports a respectful and more comfortable interaction between families and school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 8 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The list of requested languages are: Albanian, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French-Haitian Creole, Korean, Polish, Punjabi, Russian, Spanish, and Urdu. Approximately 70% of the students' home language is Spanish followed by approximately 8% Bengali. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None at this time. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families procedures to ensure See notations next to each document. There are a number of key documents that are distributed to families throughout the school year. The documents include: IEP Conference Dates (usually given annually); student handbooks given at the beginning of each school year; calendar of parent workshops (distributed monthly); calendar of school events and testing dates (given annually and monthly); parent-teacher conference notifications (given twice a year); New York State Testing Date(s) notification letters (distributed twice near the testing dates); communication letters and documents between ENL teachers and parents (given out when needed); summer school letters (given out once a year); report cards (distributed four times per year); and, letters from the Principal's Office (distributed when needed). Letters are written in Spanish (due to the large number of Spanish speaking students). For the other languages, materials are either written or translated orally for the needs of our families. timely provision of translated documents to parents. If translations are not available through the DOE website or automatically generated through SESIS (Special Education Student Information System) documentation, the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be contacted. Other communications can be translated/interpreted by staff in either written or translated orally for the needs of our families. 9  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings The following face-to-face meetings take place during the school year: Parent-Teacher Conferences (twice a year); meetings between teachers and parents (when necessary); IEP meetings (usually annually); parent workshops (monthly); guidance counselor and other related service(s) meetings (when needed); and, attendance teacher inquiries (when needed). See notations next to each document. How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? If translations for notifications are not available through the DOE website or automatically generated through SESIS (Special Education Student Information System) documentation and we are not able to provide translation and or interpretation through our staff, the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be contacted. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. During the intake process, interviews with parents, Parent Engagement events and support groups, parent language needs have been assessed. ENL teachers are an integral part of this assessment. This information is disseminated to staff in preparation for emergency contact. Teachers, paraprofessionals, related service providers and office staff are called upon to translate/interpret. 0  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. School staff understands the necessity of communicating with families in their home language and is surveyed to compile an extensive list of languages and proficiencies in those languages. This information is disseminated to all sites as a resource to better support communication in home language. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At the beginning of the school year(s) (2017-2018, 2018-2019), during the intake process, interviews with parents, Parent Engagement events and support groups, a list will be compiled to represent home language needs. Parents will be advised of their rights to have documents and communications translated or interpreted for them. All parents whose home language is other-than-English will be notified of the school's translation services via written notices and home phone contact. We will utilize the assistance of the Department of Education's Translation and Interpretation Unit when necessary. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parental feedback is critical to the success of our ENL program as well as our school. The ENL teachers will be the primary staff responsible for gathering information from parents of limited English proficiency. Communication from parents is shared with all appropriate staff to best support students and families. Information will be received via written and oral communication. Other parental sources of feedback may be through the parent coordinator; during formal and informal parent-teacher conferences; during teacher and related service progress updates, school surveys and any parental communication with the school . The gathered information will be communicated to the school's administration for review and evaluation. Parental correspondence will be kept in each ENL teacher's compliance binder. 1 
