 75Q023 School Name: P.S. Q023 @ QUEENS CHILDREN CENTER Principal: JACQUELINE JONES   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.23Q 307500014023 K-12 School Number (DBN): 75Q023 74-03 Commonwealth Blvd, Bellerose, New York 11426 718-264-4880 Phone Number: 718-264-4836 Fax: Jackie Jones Jjones28@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Jackie Jones Paulette Scott Dolores Griffith Scott LoPresti N/A To Be Determined Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: To Be Determined District Information Geographical District: 75 KetlerLouissaint Superintendent: 400 1 st Avenue, New York, NY 10022 Superintendent’s Office Address: KLouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-857-0565 Phone Number: 212-802-1501 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Jude Arthur FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Ketler Louissaint Executive Director: 400 1 st Avenue, New York, New York 10022 Jarthur2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1520 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jackie Jones Paulette Scott Dolores Griffith N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Henrietta Maier Cherley Mingot Georgia Ghicas *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lisa Marulli Member/Paraprofessional Tommy Bonello Marla Bonello Zulma Fuentes Member/ Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of P23 Q is to move students back to a less restrictive environment while providing the child with academic rigor, social emotional learning where students learn to optimize their emotional intelligence along with exposure to the arts, technology and music. To this end, we have formed collaborative partnerships with various agencies that offer performances, hands on theater, art, technology, and music workshops, which provide opportunities for socialization.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P23 Q is a multi-site organization K-12, comprised of 5 different sites at various locations within day treatment agency and hospital settings. Our agency affiliates include NYCCC, (Intensive Day Treatment, Queens Day Treatment, Upper School, Fox Academy), Lifeline Center for Child Development, Zucker-Hillside Psychiatric Hospital, Elmhurst Hospital, and St. Mary’s Hospital for Children. None of our programs are located within a community school or a free-standing school building. For any student to attend our school, he/she must be screened by the specific agency/hospital. Any decision, from admission to discharge and class placement, must include the clinical component and is collaborative. We are considered a psycho-educational milieu. Students who attend P23 Q are admitted after all other options for school placement have been exhausted. We are the most restrictive placement within District 75, Citywide Programs. Students entering our program have spent much of their previous school time in crisis, out of the classroom, in detention, hospitalized or being truant. Many students have learning deficits due to the amount of time not spent in class. Our rigorous instructional program follows the Department of Education Uniform Curriculum in addition to providing academic intervention services across the grades. It is customized, inclusive, motivating and aligned to the common core. Our classes are formed primarily based upon a student’s social emotional needs and then instructional levels which provides a supportive environment and establishes a school culture where students feel safe. All our classrooms have a wide variety of instructional materials to accommodate the individual needs of each student. Standardized high school students earn credits and can earn Regents diplomas. Despite the high admission and discharge rate of our students we provide an instructional program that is challenging to them, while providing our students with the necessary medical/clinical supports to prepare them to successfully transition back to a less restrictive environment. All staff members work towards the shared goal of improving student outcomes. Our administration lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff. Even though the teachers, paraprofessionals and administration are dealing with a severely volatile student body on a daily basis, (with psychiatrically impaired students, in the most restrictive environment the Department of Education has to offer), our teachers are committed to the success and improvement of the students in their charge. The challenges that we face as a school are the student's behaviors/mental illness that impedes their academic functioning as well as socialization skills. We deal with these challenges through PBIS, point system behavior modification, Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT) and individual therapy. Dialectical Behavior Therapy or DBT is a cognitive behavioral approach to treatment. Students are introduced to a variety of DBT skills such as mindfulness, emotion regulation, distress tolerance, and interpersonal effectiveness. The goal of DBT is to change negative thinking patterns and self destructive behaviors into positive outcomes. P 23 Q continued it's partnerships with the Little Kids Rock, a nationwide program which uses innovative music education approaches to involve students in creating music. With Multiple partnerships (with AMP Up NYC, Berklee College of Music, Rock and Roll Forever Foundation, etc.) Little Kids Rock provides modern band instruments and extensive curricular resources and professional development opportunities at no cost to participants. P23Q students from grades 3 through 12 have been learning guitar, bass, keyboards, and drums while playing contemporary and classic popular music. Students and staff created a social emotionally charged performance H.E.L.P. (songs of Hope, empowerment, Love, and Peace inspired by the youth Movement of the 1960's). P 23Q continued to participate in the Broadway Bridges program. The program aims to enable as many NYC high school students to attend Broadway theatre productions as possible by providing discount tickets to current productions. P23Q sent a contingent of high school students to see the Classic Stage Company’s production of 0  Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar and Signature Theatre Company’s productions of Paradise Blue and Our Lady of 121st Street. For the fourth consecutive year, P 23Q @ Lifeline also participated in NYCDOE’s Digital Theatre Program. Through the Office of Arts and Special Project’s partnership with C&T Theatre in England, students used theatre techniques to explore contemporary issues and shared their work with students from around NYC and the world. The theme of this year’s project was migration. Students researched migration stories from people in their community, dramatized selected stories, and shared the videos on an interactive digital platform complete with maps displaying the migration journeys. A NYCDOE student share out of the work and celebration of the project is scheduled for June. We received a Reso-A technology grant that will afford us the opportunity to upgrade our technology program at our in-patient high school program The Fox Academy. We encourage and develop partnerships with families, businesses and community based organizations in preparing our students for a lifetime of success. At the high school level, we provide students with an extended day program, which provides Regents remediation and enrichment with an opportunity for credit recovery. In addition, students can participate in a work-study program with community partnerships that have been created. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P23 Q students’ range of disabilities includes students with serious emotional disturbances, multiple disabilities and health impairments. Students who attend our program are from the five boroughs. Students demonstrate a wide range of cognitive and academic needs resulting from severe emotional deficits and learning disabilities. As a result, all of the children require an intensive day treatment and therapeutic clinical model inclusive of full time medical supports in addition to educational services. The school has an extremely high transition rate as the medical/psychiatric component of the program attempts to stabilize and treat the child and family in as short a period as possible in an effort to return the child to a less restrictive environment. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Key Area of Focus for This School Year: Increase Social Emotional Learning throughout all sites. Continue to enhance our high school program: Academically, CDOS and Vocational Training to provide opportunities with students with psychiatric challenges to graduate from high school. Increase strong Family-Community Ties. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75Q023 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) 313 SIG Recipient (Y/N) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Drama # Music # Dance # CTE N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 7 School Composition (2017-18) 83.0% % Attendance Rate 80.2% % Reduced Lunch 4.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.3% 26.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 21.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 86.2% 2.2% 80.8% 39.3% 10.2% 1.9% 6 6% 9.3 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Teachers are provided with weekly professional development training to provide rigorous instruction in all subject areas. Teachers have an opportunity to visit an on-site UFT Teacher Resource Center. The Master Teacher Professional Development/Para Educator programs provide weekly opportunities for both teachers and paraprofessionals to customize instruction, learn techniques for motivating students and for setting high standards in every classroom. Due to the transitional nature of our hospital/day treatment programs, data trends are difficult to measure as the student population can vary from day to day, week to week and month to month. However, we monitor individual student growth and teachers meet weekly to discuss and share individual student trends as they arise. At P23 Q, we utilize a variety of ways to measure and report on student progress and achievement: report cards, teacher observation, standardized ELA and Math test results, Performance Series and Fountas and Pinnell assessments. 2. Data collected from teacher team meetings, teacher assessments, teacher observations, 3rd grade standardized ELA results, and Fountas & Pinnell, indicate that a need for improved ELA proficiency particularly in the area of reading comprehension. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in grades K-3, continuously enrolled in our day treatment programs will demonstrate improvement in reading comprehension as evidenced by at least a two letter/level increase as measured on the Fountas and Pinnell fall to spring benchmark assessments. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide professional development for teachers and administrators on the implementation and/or continuation of curriculum and curriculum pacing aligned to Fountas and Pinnell grades K-3.. Teachers to use formative assessment data to monitor student progress and adjust instruction to identify students that need additional instruction. Daily review of letters, sounds and site words. Bench mark 09/19; Mid year 02/19; End of Year 05/18. Use data from observations and walk-throughs to determine alignment to curriculum and implementation. Four cycles for Walk-throughs: Oct/Nov; Dec/Jan; Feb/Mar; April/May. Administrators will rotate so that every administrator observes each teacher at least once. Weekly or bi-monthly cabinet meetings. Families will be kept apprised about student progress in order to help improve student outcomes. Daily point sheets, parent/teacher communication book, parent out-reach phone contact. Allocate money in budget for substitute teachers to provide adequate time for teachers to assess students. Allocate money in budget for new Open Court K-3 Reading Curriculum. 09/18 – 06/19 K-3 students in day treatment programs K-3 09/18 – 06/19 students in day treatment programs Teacher Resource Center Classroom teachers; Principal; Assistant Principals K-3 09/18 – 06/19 Principal, Assistant Principals students in day treatment programs 09/18– 06/19 K-3 students in day treatment programs 09/18 – 06/19 09/18 – 06/19 Classroom teachers grades K-3 Classroom teachers grades K-3 Teachers, Parent Coordinator Kelly Kraly Principal Principal 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State Standards so that they can support their children at home by providing them with workshops throughout the school year. In addition, information will be sent home to the parents monthly by the teachers as to what is being covered in the classrooms and what the expectations are both academically and behaviorally. Designated time for parent outreach - Teachers (Tuesday afternoons); Translation services for all ELL students; School Messenger; Principal Update Newsletter (Quarterly); Parent Coordinator Workshops, Guidance Counselor Workshops. Key personnel will be parent coordinator, guidance counselor, teachers, support staff and administration as needed. Guidance Counselor has scheduled meeting for parents of students in grades 8-12 on prior to parent teacher conferences 11/20/18. to discuss graduation requirements and to offer support to parents navigating the college application process. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal and Cabinet, Teachers, Paraprofessionals to reach out to families via phone, email or in parent notebooks. Parent and Family engagement will be achieved through the Teacher Resource Center where parent workshops will be offered based on needs assessment. Use of technology to expand web page so that calendar of events will be available to all parents. NYTSL Funds to purchase supplemental materials. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 10% of students in grades K-3 will show an increase in one letter grade on mid-year Fountas and Pinnell assessment as compared to the fall 2018 baseline assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fontas and Pinnell assessment will be administer in the fall, winter and spring. ; Open Court baseline fall, mid-year, and spring; Teacher observation. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Students enter our program due to emotional and behavior difficulty. The students receive intense therapy from both an agency therapist and psychiatrist. According to the school's Positive Behavior Instructional Supports (PBIS), data for the 2017-2018 school year, 37 out of 64 students (58%) of students attending our day treatment programs were only able to achieve level one out three levels on our PBIS behavior system. Daily point sheets, calming room anecdotal logs are collected and recorded. Crisis room logs are collected and recorded. The logs and anecdotal data all indicate that there are a certain number of students that are constantly being asked to leave the classroom due to inappropriate behavior or behaviors that cause other students in the classroom to feel unsafe. Students need to learn strategies and be provided with support to learn how to control these behaviors so that they can stay in their classrooms so that they do not lose instructional time. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. From September 2018 to June 2019 using the Social Emotional RULER Framework and PBIS data there will be an 10% increase in the number of students moving up a behavioral performance level from September 2018 - June 2019 in grades K-5. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Review Records of Daily point sheets to see if there is a pattern where student is not earning points (am classes, pm classes etc.) Students and teachers 09/2018 - 06/2019 PBIS Coordinator Review Weekly points sheets for PBIS data to determine the number of students who achieve level one, two or three. Identify those students who consistently make level 1 for three weeks in a row. Have therapist/teacher conference with individual students about behaviors/points. Assembly about The Ruler, Mindfulness Training. Yoga/Mindfulness and Wellness classes Students in each grade receive two yoga classes per week Students in crisis are seen by Yoga instructor on as need basis and names and times are documented to see if there is a pattern Families kept apprised of students’ behavior via point sheets daily, weekly phone calls and quarterly progress reports; dissemination of PBIS Parent Handbook and School Safety Handbook. Crisis Intervention Teacher Administration Students and teachers 09/2018 – 06/2019 Administration Yoga Instructor 09/2018 – 06/2019 PBIS Coordinator Administration Parent/ Guardian Teachers Parent Workshop: Topic- Social Emotional Training Parents 09/2019 Administration 02/2019 Parent Coordinator 05/2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 8  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshop with Administration, teachers September 2018 - June 2019. Student progress reports and point sheets. For students that may not buy into the PBIS program we will provide 10 minute morning meetings for all students to review social emotional skills and how they relate to the PBIS program. In addition students will be encouraged to "set the direction" at the various grade levels in terms of what would motivate the students to want to participate in the PBIS program. Student input that becomes incorporated into the program from those that are not as engaged may be the impetus to get them to buy into the program. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PBIS Coordinator Parent Coordinator PBIS Store Replenishment Student Luncheons Student Trips Advisory Periods to review social emotional skills Yoga/Mindfulness classes Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. From September 2018 to February 2019 using the Social Emotional RULER Framework and PBIS data there will be an 5% increase in the number of students moving up a behavioral performance level in grades K-5. 9  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Statistics from PBIS data and number of anecdotal forms. Feedback from teachers/clinicians. Monthly review of crisis logs/anecdotals statistics. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The data from 2017-2018 EOY Performance Series:  71 students that took the ELA Performance Series test in October 2017, 22 students (31%) showed a decline in ELA scaled score in May 2018 assessment.  69 students that took the Math Performance Series test in October 2017, 21 students (30%) showed a decline in Math end of year May 2018 assessment. The students of P.23Q are admitted into this program via hospital and agency screening due to psychiatric disabilities or psychotic breaks. It takes a minimum of 6 weeks for students to stabilize after intense therapy session prior to taking the expected standardized assessments. We collaborate with the agency on the students readiness through weekly team treatment meetings where teachers and therapist share progress. Therefore our testing data is inconsistent due to the transition and complexities of student population. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 students in grades 3 -8 and 9-12 will demonstrate a 100 point increase in ELA and Math scaled scores as measured by Performance Series/Scantron Tests from the October 2018 assessment to June 2019 assessment. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Examine and assess BOY (Beginning of Year) data to identify trends. Students 09/2018- 05/2019 Data Specialist Classroom teachers Administration Teachers 09/2018- 05/2019 D75 UFT Teacher Resource Room  Provide professional development for staff to learn different approaches to students with severe behavior problems.  Provide professional development on a variety of topics that will enable teachers to review/analyze student work to determine trends. Paraprofessionals Administration  Examine and assess the rigor of student work.  Common Core aligned curriculum with collaborative Teachers 09/2018-– 05/2019 D75 Math Coach Master Teacher PD Workshops Para Educator PD Workshops AIS Teacher teacher teams to review student progress. Administrators Teacher Teams Coach Data Specialist 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Tuesday parent outreach by classroom teachers; Quarterly progress reports to be completed by the subject area teachers, daily point sheets completed by the teacher/paraprofessional with the students. These are sent home and need to be signed by the parent in grades K-5; parent teacher conferences and report cards. Data specialist will oversee that report cards are completed in a timely manner so they can be copied and given to the parents. In addition, many classrooms grades K-5 have a parent communication book that goes home daily where the teacher communicates with the parent and vice versa. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. UFT Resouce Center UFT Teacher Resource Coordinator UFT Resource Center for Professional Development Data Specialist Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 students in grades 3 -8 and 9-12 will demonstrate a 50 point increase in ELA and Math scaled scores as measured by Performance Series/Scantron Tests from the October 2018 assessment to February 2019 assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Review minutes from each Professional Learning Communities (at weekly cabinet meetings) Analyze student portfolios (Quarterly aligned to report cards and progress reports) Review Performance Series results (3 times a year: Fall, Mid-year and Spring) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During formal and informal observations it became apparent that our non-tenured teachers were struggling in Domain 1 Planning and Preparation, specifically the area of Designing Coherent Instruction(1E). Teachers need assistance in the development of lesson plans that include pre-planned questions/prompts that lead to high order thinking discussions, differentiation and incorporation of IEP goals. Principal and Assistant Principal observations and discussions provided evidence for the need to increase best practices in the areas of planning and preparation. Principal's Performance Review. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will build non-tenured teachers' capacity in the area of Designing Coherent Instruction to engage students with challenging curriculum as evidenced by increasing an average of 5% on their MOTP from the previous year. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The principal and assistant principals will conduct ongoing short/formal observations and evaluate the evidence collected against Danielson’s Framework for Teaching. School Leaders 09/2018- 06/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals School leaders plan schedule for observations. Four Cycles of Observations 09/2018 Principal/Assistant Principal Create common planning time for teachers to work together to plan lessons across grades. Teachers 09/2018 - 06/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals Unit Coordinators PD Election Day (Grouped by grades) 11/2018 Instructional Leaders Teachers Classroom visits by D75 Coach Math/ELA/Science/Tech Coach Norming School Leaders on Danielson Rubric, specifically in the area of 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction. School Leaders 09/2018 - 06/2019 11/2018 Norming School Leaders on Danielson Rubric specifically in the area of 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction. Teachers 11/2018 School Leaders classroom visits to give teachers feedback on 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction. Teachers ELL Teacher provided professional Development to all teachers and paraprofessionals on ELLs expectations and mandates. Binders created with all pertinent ELL information. ELL Teacher/ Compliance Liaision 12/2018 - 05/2019 09/2018 - 6/2019 D75 Math/ELA/Science/Tech Coach Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coach Instructional Coach, Instructional Leaders Teacher Leaders ELL Teacher/Compliance Liaison 5  The Master Teacher Professional Development workshops on related topics will be assigned to teachers. Principal, Assistant Principals School Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Quarterly Principal's Update; School Messenger; Parent Outreach Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Learning Communities/Grade conferences Create time in schedule for School Leaders to meet with non-tenured teaching staff. Common Professional periods for meetings K-5, 6-8 and 9-12. Teacher per diem so that teachers can attend professional development workshops. Substitute teacher to cover for teacher professional development Supplemental online curriculum After School per session for supervisors Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school leaders will build non-tenured teachers' capacity in the area of Designing Coherent Instruction to engage students with challenging curriculum as evidenced by increasing an average of 2.5% on their MOTP from the previous year. 6  Rotating Schedule for walk throughs (bi-monthly) October/November 2018; December/January 2019; February/March 2019; April/May 2019 Mid-year February 2019 Cabinet review of MOY Advance data (1e) June 2019 Cabinet review of EOY Advance data (1e) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Review ADVANCE data; Test scores Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P 23Q is a hospital based school. Students are screened and admitted by the hospital/agency and can remain in our school program for one day to as long as one year depending on the specific site and agency. The transitional nature of the program makes it difficult to have consistent parent participation on the SLT team and parent workshops. This year we were without a parent coordinator until January 2018. Monthly parent workshops conducted by our previous Parent Coordinator had an average of 6-8 parents participate. Our new parent coordinator began in 2018 and was able to conduct five works shops with an average of 6 parents per workshop. We will now be in search of another Parent Coordinator as our present PC is moving out of state. In the interim, the guidance counselor along with the administration will reach out to the families and provide a variety of workshops and events that will be of interest to our families. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Parent engagement and involvement will increase by 10% as compared to June 2018 measured by increased attendance workshops/programs and parent teacher conferences in alignment with the Framework for great Schools - 5E. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Outreach by Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor  Parent survey in the beginning of year (interest survey and needs assessment) distributed to NYCCC, Lifeline, St. Mary's Hospital and Fox Academy parents.  Monthly meetings for parents on a variety of topics based on needs assessment sent to parents  Outreach by Parent Coodinator - Survey at end of year for following school year (interest survey).  Chancellor’s designated parent contact on Tuesday afternoons Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents of students at all sites 09/ 2018- 06/ 2019 Parent Coordinator Guidance Counselor School Administrators 09/ 2018- 06 2019 Teachers, Unit Coordinators, Administration, Parent Coordinator Parents of students that are in jeopardy of failing and/or to give positive reports to parents. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NEW YORK METS provide tickets for our students to attend games with their families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator Budget Parent Coordinator Guidance Counselor to schedule breakfast meeting in September for parents of high school students to discuss promotional criteria and expectations for students in the high school program. 9  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Parent engagement and involvement will increase by 5% as compared to February 2018 measured by increased attendance workshops/programs and parent teacher conferences in alignment with the Framework for great Schools - 5E. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Meet the Administrator Meeting. Sign in Sheets from Parent Coordinator events. Review parent/teacher phone logs. Sign in Sheets from Guidance Counselor meetings with parents. Guidance Counselor Parent Meeting with high school parents in November 2018, and again in March 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NYS ELA Test results for students in grades 3-8 F&P results Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Based on needs of students: repeated readings, interactive writings, practice essays, vocabulary practice. Regents test prep books. Computer based tutorial programs. for students in K-3 Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group/one-to-one instruction. During the school day. Extra help sessions. After-school After school program.. Mathematics Science Regents NYS MATH Test results for students in grades Based on needs of students: Computer based tutorial programs. Peer to peer. Manipulatives, calculator training. 3-8 Go MATH Assessment grades K-8 Teacher assessments Regents Based on needs of students: Computer based tutorial programs. Peer to peer. Science vocabulary prep books. Barons practice regents books. Small group/one to one instruction. During the school day. Extra help sessions. After-school After school program. Small group/one to one instruction. During the school day. Extra help sessions. After-school 1  Social Studies Teacher assessments Regents At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Parent request and/or clinical request Based on needs of students: Computer based tutorial programs. Baron's regents books. One on one meeting. Small group/one to one instruction. During the school day. Extra help sessions. After-school After school program. Small group/one to one instruction. During the school day. Extra help sessions. After-school After school program. 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 5  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Column B Section Reference(s) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 6  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  7   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P. 23Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. .23Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 9  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 0  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P 23Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 1  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 3  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 4  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name P 23Q Borough Queens School Number 023 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jacqueline Jones Assistant Principal Pam Hicks Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Babita Hiralall Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Coach School Counselor Parent Bernice Williams Parent Coordinator Debbie Hamburger Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 328 6 Total number of ELLs 19 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.79%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 3 2 4 1 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P23Q uses Fountas & Pinnell to assess the early literacy skills of our students in grades K-3; The Scantron, Performance Series was used to assess literacy skills in grades 9-12. For our alternate assessment students SANDI and SANDI Fast were used to assess literacy skills. The data helps teachers determine the progress in literacy development and plan for instruction accordingly. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our ENL teacher attends PLC meetings, assesses students' needs and supports teachers with ELL materials including dictionaries, glossaries, computer sites and aids in classroom teacher made materials to facilitate language acquistion. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 7  The success of P 23 's program for ELLs is measured by analyzing the rate of student progress towards meeting English language development goals. language acquisition goals are analyzed for each respective grade as well as native language development for students in our free standing ENL program. Some indicators of student performance are the results of assessments, teacher observations, teacher/student conferences, and student portfolios. Programs for ELLs are also evaluated on the basis of consistent student participation in programs such as after school credit recovery program. Moreover our Language Proficiency Team (here in and after known as "LPT"), meets on a regular basis to ensure all federal, state and city mandates are complied with and student progress continues to improve. On going parental involvement in our workshops also serve as indicators of the success of specific ELL programs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Our ENL teacher attends PLC meetings, assesses students' needs and supports teachers with ELL materials including dictionaries, glossaries, computer sites and aids in classroom teacher made materials to facilitate language acquisition. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] With regard to RTI, P23 Q utilizes data from PBIS point sheets, anecdotals, communication books with parents, IEPs, family conferences as well as therapeutic collaborative meetings. We recognize that ELLs require instruction that takes into consideration the linguistic demands of academic tasks. Our school adheres to the two key premises of RTI; all children can learn when provided with appropriate, effective instruction and most academic difficulties can be prevented with early identification of need followed by immediate intervention. Based on assessments students receive AIS according to their individual needs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT shows that at the Entering (beginning) level we have a total of 12 students, 1 in the 5th grade, 1 in the 6th grade, 1 in the 8th grade, and 3 in the 9th grade, 3 in the 10th grade, 2 in the 11th grade and 1 in the 12th grade. In Emerging (Low Intermediate) we have 1 student in the 5th grade, 1 student in the 8th grade, 1 in the 10th grade and 1 in the 11th grade. Transitioning (High Intermediate) we have 1 student in the 3rd grade. Our Expanding (Advanced) level we have 1 student in 6th grade, and 1 student in the 9th grade. This data shows that there are 10 students who are considered Newcomers, 5 students that are developing and 4 students that are long term. We have 1 SIFE student, 17 ELLs students with disabilities and 2 ELLs students without IEPs for a total of 19 ELL students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our ENL teacher attends PLC meetings, assesses students' needs and supports teachers with ELL materials including dictionaries, glossaries, computer sties, and aids in classroom teacher made materials to facilitate language acquisition. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our school is unique because we have five separate locations and we teach within a hospital setting. Additionally, our students are very transient. Therefore, we may have an ELL student at anytime in the school year, for any duration of time. Given our schools unique transient student population our ENL program implements an integrated 8  and standalone push-in/pull-out model depending on students proficient levels and as per CR Part 154.2 guidelines. This is done in an effort to allow for continuity and alignment of instruction in our heterogeneous classes. An essential part of instructional strategy in our school setting is analyzing our student’s different learning styles and being cognoscenti of how that changes because of their medical needs. Therefore, the grouping of our students is prioritized according to our students medical needs and then their educational needs are used to group them according to CR Part 154.2. b. TBE program. If applicable. Currently, our school only features Free Standing ENL program. c. DL program. If applicable. Currently, our school only features Free Standing ENL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Given the uniqueness of our school's transient programs, each site's instructional minutes is catered to their population. Therefore, for our Hospital Sites, at Zucker-Hillside Adolescent Pavillion, St. Mary's Hospital for Children and at Elmhurst Hospital, and Fox Academy our ENL teacher collaborates with teachers during their prep at the being of the day. All of our ENL students receive their mandated service times in both Stand Alone ENL and/or Integrated ENL in ELA/Content Area. At our sites at P23 Queens at NYC Children's Center (NYCCC), IDT, QDT, Fox Academy and Lifeline Center for Child Development our ENL teacher collaborates with the ELA teacher to co-teach according to the CR Part 154 mandates. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction in English using ENL strategies such as: The Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach (CALLA) for students in standardized assessment, Total Physical Response (TPR), Language Experience, Whole Language, Cooperative Learning and QTEL (Quality Teaching for English Learners) strategies which focus on scaffolding techniques. Multisensory approaches in conjunction with communication symbols will also be used. Content area teachers will work collaboratively with the ENL teacher and will use graphic organizers, text representation, modeling and bridging infused into instruction. Extensive English language exposure will be provided through explicit instruction in the areas of grammar, vocabulary development and oral expression. Visuals will be used to assist comprehension, and multi-cultural materials will be infused throughout all aspects of instruction. Students’ native languages and cultural backgrounds will be activated to facilitate second language acquisition, and the use of technology, music and visual cues are all incorporated to give students additional instructional support. In addition, the ENL teacher together with the classroom teachers plan collaboratively in the development of lesson plans for the levels of language proficiency and the skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing. Activities are also differentiated based on students' proficiency level. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? With help from the LAC, LPT the ENL teacher and site coordinators, periodic reviews the students language data sheet to ensure that ELLs are appropriately being evaluated in their home language throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) Students with Interrupted/Inconsistent Formal Education (SIFE) will be encouraged to use skills they may have previously acquired in their home language to help them catch up on the knowledge they need to pass the grade, along with explicit instruction in the areas of grammar, vocabulary and oral expression. Visuals will be used to assist comprehension. AIS will be 9  provided throughout the week. For, our SIFE high school students our extended after school program provides test- prep, credit -recovery, and vocational training. b) Newcomers (ELLs in schools less than three years) will be provided with tutoring and peer mentoring. A buddy system will be implemented and students will be paired to help each other. Student’s native languages and cultural backgrounds will be activated to facilitate second language acquisition. Graphic organizers, text representation, book adaptations, modeling and visuals will be infused throughout instruction to facilitate comprehension and language development. A nurturing environment and AIS during the extended school day will also be provided. Our newcomers are also provided with after-school programs. c) ELLs who have received an extension of services (receiving services 4 to 6 years) will continue to receive ENL services, as per their IEP, in accordance with their proficiency levels indicated on the NYSESLAT. We will continue to provide ENL instruction that follows the NYS ESL standards and core curriculum and incorporates ESL strategies such as: The Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach (CALLA), Total Physical Response (TPR), Language Experience, Whole Language, Scaffolding, and Cooperative Learning. Extensive English language exposure will be provided through explicit instruction in the areas of grammar, vocabulary development and oral expression. Visuals will be used to assist comprehension, and multi-cultural materials will be infused throughout all aspects of instruction. Our certified ENL teacher utilizes a Push-in/Push-out model of instruction and works with the classroom teachers to plan collaboratively in the development of lesson plans for the level of language proficiency and skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing. Students are also supported throughout the academic day. d) Long-term ELL students will be given ENL services as per federal mandates and we will provide extra services such as extended tutoring times in addition to the services described above in order to bring them to grade level. e) Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status - These are students who had been identified as English language learners and subsequently exited from ELL status. For at least two years following the school year in which a student is exited from ELL status, former ELL status, former ELLs receive at least one half of one unit of study of English as a new language (90 minutes per week) and are eligible for certain specified testing accommodations. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL teacher will collaborate with the classroom teachers to review materials to determine the correct proficiency levels for the ENL students. Students participate all content core subjects as well as in art, music, drama and computers as electives. In the art, music, drama and computer rooms students have visual, auditory, and tactile supports in the classroom as well as theme-based projects. All materials are content specific and common core aligned. These grade level instructional strategies provide teachers with a way to retrieve students background knowledge utilizing TPR, while developing their language acquisition. In computer class the students have access to media, visual, auditory, and tactile supports in both L2 and L1. Our hands-on science curriculum supports ELLs by allowing them to learn scientific principles through experiments, visuals, and interactive games. All ENL students will have personal dictionaries, and glossaries in their native language and the ENL teacher will give the content specific area teacher language specific materials to supplement the classroom teaching material. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P23Q is apart of the NYC district 75 Special Education Program, therefore our students are offered an individualized education program (IEP) with mandate goals and objectives. Our students are assessed by our LPT and includes a review of IEP mandates and Language Data Sheets. As these needs and goals are met our students transition to a least restrictive environment. Since, we have a transient population with general education and special education and students usually go back to their home school. During our summer youth programs, students work in the communities with non disabled peers and are taught specific skills to enhance their social and communication skills. 0  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school offers a range of intervention services in the areas of ELA, math and other content areas. Intervention services offered at P23 for ELLs include technology based, such as SmartBoard, multimedia projectors, audio speakers, digital cameras, laptop computers, color printers and internet access in the classrooms. Our AIS coordinator provides small group instruction. Some additional instructional materials that are used to support ELLs: 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? There are several new programs that are being considered for the new school year. The ENL teacher will work collaboratively with the Home Economic teacher to develop the new student garden program. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time our school will not discontinue any of its ENL programs, and3 will enhance it according to the 2015-16 CPR- 154 NYC policies and procedures. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students (ELLs and non-ELLs) are afforded equal access to all school programs. Students who need extra academic help will receive additional assistance in the form of after-school program and AIS. The programs considered for the upcoming year include the following: a Music/Drama program for grades 6-8, CHAMPS program for grades 5-8, a Credit Recovery Program and Vocational classes for grades 9-12. At the present time, all our programs are working successfully and will not be discontinued. Instructional materials such as books on folktales, biographies and autobiographies, fiction and non-fiction, and content area informational books and glossaries will be used to support ELLs. The use of technology will give students additional instructional support. Multi-cultural materials will be infused throughout all aspects of instruction, and students’ native languages and cultural backgrounds will be activated to facilitate second language acquisition. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The use of technology will give students additional instructional support. Multi-cultural materials will be infused throughout all aspects of instruction, and students’ native languages and cultural backgrounds will be activated to facilitate second language acquisition. To comply with the New York City’s literacy requirements, each library will contain books in native languages, including those adapted by teachers to meet the needs of students with severe disabilities. All support and resources will correspond to ELLs’ grade, functional, and native language proficiency levels. Content Area Instruction is taught by content area teachers that work collaboratively with the ENL teacher. Infused into instruction in are graphic organizers, technology, text representations, modeling and bridging. Extensive English language exposure will be provided through instruction in the areas of grammar, vocabulary development, and oral expression. Visuals are used to assist comprehension. Content area instructional programs are aligned with mandated standards with ENL, ELA and the New York State Common Core Learning Standards. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our Freestanding ENL program, home language support is delivered by giving students bilingual dictionaries and/or glossaries that provide one-to-one translation of words and definitions or explanations. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 1  All sites are provided with a language data sheet which specifies the required resources/services that support and correspond to ELLs' ages and grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The use of technology will give students additional instructional support. Multi-cultural materials will be infused throughout all aspects of instruction, and students’ native languages and cultural backgrounds will be activated to facilitate second language acquisition. To comply with the New York City’s literacy requirements, each library will contain books in native languages, including those adapted by teachers to meet the needs of students with severe disabilities. All support and resources will correspond to ELLs’ grade, functional, and native language proficiency levels. Content Area Instruction is taught by content area teachers that work collaboratively with the ENL teacher. Infused into instruction in are graphic organizers, technology, text representations, modeling and bridging. Extensive English language exposure will be provided through instruction in the areas of grammar, vocabulary development, and oral expression. Visuals are used to assist comprehension. Content area instructional programs are aligned with mandated standards with ENL, ELA and the New York State Common Core Learning Standards. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year, we hold orientations with families to share suggestions for literacy activities that can be done in the home and inform parents of learning resources in the community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All students, including ELLs, are offered Spanish and French as a foreign language in grades 9-12. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Currently, our school only features ENL program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teachers that who are not ENL Certified or Bilingual Certified will adhere to state and city mandates of professional development hours also included in CR Part 154.2. Teacher's will be given the opportunity to fulfill this mandate through P23's school's designated professional development workshops during the school year. Teacher's of ELLs and those who hold a bilingual certification can fulfill these requirements though regional, state, and UFT workshops. ENL teacher will meet bi-monthly with the Language Proficiency team to create a schedule of professional development for all teachers. The ENL teacher will also participate in the site unit coordinator meetings to establish and maintain the state mandates throughout all 5 sites. The ENL teacher and the pupil accounting secretary work collaboratively together to assure that all mandates are met as well as meet in the designated professional development sessions on Monday afternoons from 2:30PM to 4:00 PM Our special education teachers have completed the minimum of 5 hours of ELL training as per Jose P. New teachers receive training as well. Teachers who receive Jose P. training are exposed to theories of first and second language acquisition, ENL 2  methodologies, approaches and strategies used to foster second language acquisition. All staff are given the opportunity to register for professional development through the district 75 PD offering. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our staff participates in an orientation, in order to familiarize them with the articulation process as they transition from elementary to middle and/or middle to high school. Our ELLs are given literature that is also mailed and sent home in their native language. This gives their parents information about the different programs/schools available and the deadlines for admissions. We also take our students to middle school fairs and school visits to aid them in their selection process. The guidance counselor will participate in the professional development offered through the district 75 PD offerings as well as meet with the ENL teacher to become familiar with the new state mandates to help the students transition from elementary to middle and from middle school to high school. Teachers that who are not ENL Certified or Bilingual Certified will adhere to state and city mandates of professional development hours also included in CR Part 154.2. Teacher's will be given the opportunity to fulfill this mandate through P23's school's designated professional development workshops during the school year. Teacher's of ELLs and those who hold a bilingual certification can fulfill these requirements though regional, state, and UFT workshops. Professional Development agendas and attendance will be maintained with Teacher's Language Assurance Sheets in a binder according to CPR 154.2. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The LPT and LAC coordinates periodic and annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss their Language Data Sheets and results of assessments and students present and future needs. The translation services that are used are the Department of Education translation unit via phone. All school documents are translated through the ENL's native language and are distributed to parents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school has significant number of ELLs and parents /guardians that need any extra support because they are unable to understand English as determined by the Parent Language Survey. All of our ELL parents are included in our mainstream parent activities. Such activities include: Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 3  4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jacqueline Jones, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P23 School DBN: 75233 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jacqueline Jones Title Principal Pamela Hicks Assistant Principal Debbie Hamburger Parent Coordinator Babita Hiralall ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/19/17 06/19/17 06/19/17 06/19/17 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75 School Name: P23Q Superintendent: Ketler Louissai The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Lorentz Loriston conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Prior to admission to our school, students must participate in a collaborative process between the Department of Education and the Office of Mental Health.To identify the need for translation services, screening appointments will be scheduled. Upon enrollment, an initial interview with parents and/or guardians will be conducted along with a Home Language Identification Survey () in the parent/guardian's native language. If it is the first time a student is entering a Department of Education School the parent will be requested to indicate their home language.On the document the parent is requested to identify in which language they wish to receive both oral and written communication from the school.The HLIS survey will inform administrators, teaching staff, clinicians, and related services providers of the home language and the preferred language for communication with the parent and/or guardian.In addition, interpretation services are provided, as the need arises, in our school's native languages which include Spanish, Bengali, Korean, Chinese, Arabic, Haitian Creole, Cantonese, Burmese and . Translators will be available to come to the school or will be accessible by phone with any of the translation or interpretation needs of the parents. 7  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Mandarin Cantonese Haitian/Creole Chinese Bengali Burmese Korean Arabic 29 0 1 2 10 2 1 1 1 62% 0% 2% 4% 22% 4% 2% 2% 2% 29 2 1 2 8 2 1 1 1 62% 4% 2% 4% 18% 4% 2% 2% 2% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. We have over 327 students and none of the languages other than English represent at least 10 % of the school population. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent Workshop Letters Beginning of every month PTA - Updates Beginning of every month Parent-School Medical Alerts As needed Health forms As needed Spring Recess Letter February & April Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translation services provided by the district. Translation phone line or in person services provided by the district. Translation phone line or in person services provided by the district. Translation phone line or in person services provided by the district. Translation services provided by the district. 8  Winter Recess Letter December & February Testing Schedules Middle School: April – May Regents: January – June - August Welcome Letter September School Calendar Letter's September Bus Exclusion Letter As needed After School Program Information As needed Principal Update Monthly Report Cards 4 - 6 times a year depending on grade level Parent-Teacher Conferences November – January – March - June 2x a year (November & March) and as needed for specific parent/teacher meetings ( IEP) Translation services provided by the district. Translation services provided by the district. Translation services provided by the district. Translation services provided by the district. Translation services provided by the district. Translation services provided by the district. Translation services provided by the district. Translation services provided by the district. Translation phone line or in person services provided by the district. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Placement Meeting As needed Discharge Meeting As needed I.E.P. Meeting As needed Disciplinary Meeting As needed interpretation service(s)? Translation phone line or in person services provided by the district. Translation phone line or in person services provided by the district. Translation phone line or in person services provided by the district. Translation phone line or in person services provided by the district. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, we have a Language Interpretation line service which ensures that any message via phone communicated with parents, is received in the parent’s home language. If necessary, a three way call with an interpretation service will be provided by the district. 9  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During Faculty conference and extended day professional development Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In order to fulfill Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulations of A-663 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services, all parents will be informed about a website posting the availability for them to obtain translation and interpretation services as well as receiving a copy of the “Bill of Parental Rights and Responsibilities” in their native language.The "Bill of Parental Rights and Responsibilities" is available and posted at the school in addition, our school provides a school saftey plan for parental information. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents of English Language Learners are given a copy of “Guide for Parents of English Language Learners” and “Bill of Parental Rights and Responsibilities” in their native language upon enrollment. When the need arises, we have been able to accommodate parents using the Translation and Interpretation unit of the Department of Education.Additional written translation services can be obtained through one of the DOE-approved contracted vendors when required. This service will translate the written notices to the parents in a timely fashion. Therefore, the Parent Coordinator along with the Language Access Coordinator will follow up with parents and conduct a parent feedback questionnaire twice a year. Once, the information is gathered about the quality of communication between parents and the school, the Language Proficiency Team will evaluate and implement the necessary steps to improve services. 0 
