 26Q031 School Name: P.S. 031 BAYSIDE Principal: TERRI GRAYBOW   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 26Q031 The Bayside School 264031001 Pre-Kindergarten-5 211-45 46th Road, Bayside, NY 11361 718-423-8289 Phone Number: 718-746-3619 Fax: Terri Graybow tgraybow@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Terri Graybow JoAnn Westhall Gina Tomasides, KehindeRaji Kristen Amato N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 26 Danielle Giunta Superintendent: 61-15 Oceania Street, Bayside NY 11364 Superintendent’s Office Address: Dgiunta4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-631-6943 Phone Number: 718-631-6996 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Queens North Executive Director: Lawrence Pendergast   28-11 Queens Plaza North Executive Director’s Office Address: Queens, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Email Address: lpender@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-391-8222 Fax: 718-391-8320   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Terri Graybow JoAnnWesthall KehindeRaji Linda Grappone NA NA NA NA Kristen Amato Laura Rice Katrina Batista *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/Parent   Julie Kim Omar Evans Karla Moscoso Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of PS 31 is to provide our children with an exemplary educational program in a safe, nurturing and stimulating environment. We strive to equip each child with experiences that connect classroom learning to real life. Our dedicated staff and involved parents are committed to excellence and are instrumental in educating the whole child. Together, we can make a difference in developing self-confident, life-long learners who will be productive citizens in a technological and culturally diverse world.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 31, the oldest school in Bayside, is a diverse community school consisting of 550 students. We live the words of the PS 31Q motto, "We are Many, We are One!" Our teachers and staff are grounded in the ideology that all children can learn when engaged in meaningful activities that are aligned to meet them at multiple entry points. We believe that students learn best when they are given the opportunity to articulate their thinking, receive immediate feedback from peers and instructors, and question the thinking of others. PS 31’s curriculum is transitioning to the Next Generation Learning Standards which provides a foundation for children to learn critical thinking skills to prepare them for College and Career. School-wide programs such as Independent Investigation Method, Book of the Month, Thinking Maps and technologically based programs such as i-Ready and Google Classroom, provide school-wide cohesion to meet the Instructional Shifts and NYS Learning Standards. We take pride in our arts program which includes a full-time visual arts teacher, full time music teacher, instrumental music and a ballroom dance residency that has become a fifth grade rite of passage. The Ballroom Dance Team competes in the Rainbow Team Match and has won both Gold and Silver Medals. In the winter and spring we host our Art Show and Concert which features both choral and instrumental performances by our students. Additionally, the concert showcases individual talents on various instruments, including piano, violin, flute and ukulele. Our art show highlights long-term projects created, in various mediums, throughout the school year. In June, our drama club performs a two-hour play that is six months in the making. It is one of the PS 31Q year-end highlights. The arts foster student creativity, self-confidence and self-expression. PS 31Q families love to root for the Blue Jays, our co-ed basketball team and marvel at our cheerleading squad during inter-school games. The basketball games are well-attended by friends, parents, grandparents, and family members and they are eager to chant, "Go Blue Jays"! Two years ago, we received a Software Engineering Pilot Grant (Sep, Jr. ). This program was formerly only in middle schools; PS 31 was one of the first elementary schools to win this grant. This program ensured students will be exposed to concepts in computational thinking and participate in the engineering design process for computer sciences. Through this grant we received 30 MAC laptops with a cart, Dot and Dash Robots, 30 iPads and many "unplugged" materials to support the Computer Science for All Vision. Teachers on each grade are trained to be able to incorporate CS4All elements across the curriculum and this gives our students a leg up in their knowledge of Computer Science and technology. Our school was recognized by the media for the implementation of our "Code Cafe" which provides all students with the opportunity to participate in coding activities. Due to our notable work integrating computer science throughout our school we have been named a Showcase School for the 2018-2019 school year. Visitors from throughout the city will observe our students in leadership roles implementing computer science best practices. Our students learn the importance of helping others by embracing Halloween Walk-A-Thons in support of the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation, collecting donations for Ronald McDonald House, writing Valentines for Veterans and sending clothing to those in need. We live by the spirit that No Act of Kindness is too Small. Students are honored monthly at well-attended PTA meetings for Student of the Month, Citizen of the Month and Most Improved. Children are provided with the opportunity be recognized in other areas as well as academics . 0  We have many systems in place to ensure that staff, students and families voices are heard which include: School website www.PS 31Q.com  School App   Class DoJo  Google Classroom  Newsletters to Families  Weekly Emailed Calendars from Principal  PTA Email Address  Telephone Messaging System  Texting System   Twitter  Google Email  Parent Coordinator Daily Emails Facebook PS 31Q exudes a sense warmth from the moment you enter our beautiful lobby. We have many systems in place to ensure the social emotional learning of all children. A weekly word of the week, involvement in the anti-defamation leagues No Place for Hate program. etc. We truly believe in our sense of community and everyone is part of The Bayside School family. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PS 31Q students are comprised of target subgroups including 11.03 % English Language Learners and 16.64% Students with Disabilities. In order to meet the learning needs of these students we have implemented the following programs:    Integrated Co-Teaching - ICT classes on each grade level. Self Contained Special Education Classes - 12:1:1 class for each grade level Special Education Teacher Support Services - provided to students needing additional support and are performing 1-2 years below grade level. These services are provided in either a push-in or pull-out model.  RTI - Six week cycles of support in a teacher recommended area of need.  Academic Intervention Services - AIS is offered to students before and after school based up data collected from state ELA and Math Exams and teacher recommendation.  Related Services - these services are generated by a student's Individualized Educational Plan (IEP). They include speech, occupational therapy, physical therapy, adapted physical education.  English as a New Language (ENL) - ENL services are provided in a pull out/push in model 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. PS 31Q strived to incorporate CS4All ideology and practice across all curriculum areas and all classrooms by integrating vocabulary, technology and unplugged activities. Student leadership was integral in supporting the success of this work. Upper grade "Code Ambassadors" pushed into classrooms, ran a lunchtime Code Cafe and helped plan computer science staff, student and family activities. Hack-a-thons, family challenges and STEAM Nights opened the pathway for parents and friends to become ingrained in the work. Students persisted through technology based projects which led them to understand that "persistence is the path to success". Our school commitment to integration and the positive effect it has had on student progress and leadership has led us to become a Computer Science Showcase School for the 2018-2019 School Year. The school has also made consistent progress in the number of students achieving a level 4 on the State ELA and Math Exams: 1  ELA Math 2016 - 22.7% 2016 - 36.3% 2017 - 23.5 % 2017 - 39.3% 2018 - 25.0 % 2018 - 45.7% After analyzing the June Instructional Report, we found that there were common threads in reading, writing and math that prompted the school/s instructional focus around small group strategies. By focusing in on small groups we can fill in the gaps that persist in each grade in the following areas: Reading Writing Math  Word Meaning Informational Main Idea Fractions   Sequencing and Cause Analyze Events Informational Word Meaning 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 26Q031 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 551 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 29 26 24 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 20 24 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 56.0% % Attendance Rate 46.3% % Reduced Lunch 12.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 20.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 13.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.1 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 58.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 95% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 53 55 95.2% 10.0% 15.1% 7.6% 57.4% 0.9% 2 5% 6.8 69.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Students have shown increased performance when given abundant, immediate and specific feedback, teacher to student, student to student and student to self. This is evidenced by an increase on teacher made assessments, TCRWP benchmark assessments, TCRWP checklists for reading and writing, EnVision Math exams and on the 2018 ELA and Math Assessments. Student Proficiency on ELA and Math State Exams ELA Math 2016 - 51.7% 2016 - 62.6% 2017 - 53.5% 2017 - 68.3% 2018 - 58.4% 2018 - 69.6% 2016–17 School Quality Snapshot / Elementary School  Showed that 91% felt students were receiving rigorous instruction which was above the city average of 83%. Although our average for rigorous instruction was at 91% it was below our previous year of 94%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 100 % of students will have received targeted small group instruction to increase the level of rigorous instruction on the School Quality Snapshot by 3%. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Key Personnel  Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? -Create a Professional Learning Committee Teachers Ongoing Principal -Develop a Professional Learning Calendar Para- Assistant Principal - Provide Professional Learning Opportunities on Small Group Instruction Strategies professionals Professional Learning Committee -Provide Inter-visitation opportunities to Share Best Practices -Review/Revise Professional Learning Calendar as Needed Assessment  Teacher Conference Notes  Glow and Grow Studies  Danielson Framework  TCRWP Benchmark Assessments School Quality Snapshot / Elementary School  Feedback Sheets   Grows and Grows  Teacher Created Spreadsheets  EnVision Math Benchmark Scores  Classroom Observation  Professional Development will be provided in the Teachers 9/18 – 11/18 Principal Assistant Principal 1/19 –3/19 4/19-5/19 5/19-6/19 Classroom and Cluster Teachers following areas: Small Group Instruction Strategies Student Conferring   Rotational and Guided Reading   Close Reading/Annotation  Actionable Feedback  Meeting Student Needs at Multiple Entry Points 5 To ensure the needs of all students will be met SWD and ELLs will be provided with differentiated checklists, anchor charts posted in each classroom and small group instruction based on student entry point. Technology can also be provided for translation and assistance. High set expectations will be achieved in every classroom with a focus on engaging all students in learning including ELLs and SWDs in rigorous Common Core/nNext Generation aligned tasks evidenced by students outcomes on work products and assessments. Parent Involvement/Engagement ELLs, EWDs 9/18-6/19 Horizontal and Vertical Teacher Teams Instructional Support Specialists PS 31 Commu- 9/18-6/19 Administrators, Teachers and Parent Coordinator ● Provide workshops that support parents in CCLS/Next Generation Standards, Instructional Shifts, curriculum, assessments and student well-being nity ● Parents will be invited to join students in classroom activities on a monthly basis Trust: Transparency across all curriculum areas; access for parents and students to monitor progress throughout all grades 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be offered workshops on grade level expectations, newsletters will provide monthly updates on benchmarks and curriculum, principal will provide weekly newsletters to families and parents/guardians will be invited into classrooms once a month to take part in various activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff Developers – iReady, EnVision, Universal Literacy Coach iReady Site License    Professional Development Time as per UFT contract  Teachers College Workshops  Appropriate Internet Resources  Professional Books/Materials 6  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 at least 50% will have received targeted small group instruction 1X per week as evidenced by teacher conference notes, classroom observation and student feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher conference notes, informal observations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The population of PS 31Q is made up of students of diverse backgrounds and cultures comprised or 19.65% Hispanic, 55.89% Asian, 7.85% Black, 14.21% White and 2.24% multi-racial. Additionally, 11.03% of our students speak English as a second language and 16.64% of our students receive special education services. As a school community we are committed to meeting the social emotional needs of all of our students. According to the School Quality Snapshot 95% of the school community felt that we were successful in creating a supportive environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students will have taken part in weekly school wide activities, classroom activities and events that focus around Social Emotional Learning based on the CASEL Core Competencies as measured by classroom observations and lesson plans. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Students will take part in No Place for Hate curriculum Students will be exposed to SEL related Words of the Week Students will have access to Book of the Month with school-wide SEL activities and tie-ins Students will act as Code Ambassadors to support leadership Students will be part of Student Organization to aide in school wide decision making        Students 9/18-6/19 Teachers Paraprofessionals Administration Strategies for Differentiation Ongoing Teachers ClassroomTeachers Paraprofessional  ELL students will be grouped in triads to support Students Administration language growth and bridge language barriers  ELL students use Google translate to aide in ESL Teachers translation  Rubrics will be differentiated for SWD and ELL  SWD's will be provided with tools for scaffolding such as talking prompts, checklists for speaking and listening SE Teachers Engaging Families PS 31 Staff Ongoing Classroom Teachers  Parent workshops will be provided on Social Emotional Learning  Parents will be invited to classroom visits monthly to collaborate with their children in lessons  Parent coordinator will provide information to parents through phone calls, school app, school website etc, to support educational initiatives Parent Coordinator Students Administration ESL and SE Teachers 9  Word of the week will be included in the weekly calendar sent to parents  Word of the week will be displayed in the lobby  Students will receive monthly certificates for Student of the Month, Most Improved and Citizen of the Month SLT will help determine materials and themes around SEL  Professional Learning and Trust PS 31 Staff 9/18-6/19 Principal Assistant Principal Parents Teachers Guidance Counselor Social Worker Psychologist  All staff will participate in professional learning around the CASEL Framework. This be on-going throughout the school year during professional development time on Mondays and Tuesdays.  Teachers will attend any relevant professional learning opportunities provided by the DOE  Common preps will be scheduled on each grade at least once a week to give teachers planning time and to share best-practices on Social Emotional Practices  The Professional Development Committee will conduct a teacher survey assessing teacher professional learning needs and effectiveness. Staff will take part in classroom inter-visitation   Principal will take part in project based learning focused on Social Emotional Learning  Principal will turn-key SEL workshops 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be offered on social emotional learning, parent coordinator will send home weekly emails including tips on giving feedback at home, families will be invited to classrooms monthly to engage with their children in curriculum based activities including SEL. Parents will receive a weekly newsletter detailing words of the week, book of the month and classroom visitation opportunities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 0  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Personnel Social Worker  Teachers  Guidance Counselor   Psychologist  Paraprofessionals  Parent Coordinator Materials  Book of the Month  No Place for Hate Curriculum  CASEL Learning Videos and printed material   iPads and Computers Family Attendance Sheets Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100 % of students will have participated in at least 5 school wide and classroom activities that support social emotional learning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Lesson Plans, classroom observations, classroom environment ratings on the Danielson scale and student feedback to administrators. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the NYC School Survey and the Framework for Great Schools Report:  92% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have been sustained and coherently focused, rather than short-term and unrelated.  Based in the survey analysis we need to provide teachers with long term focused professional development and allow them additional opportunity to work with peers. Although 92% is a relatively strong number we will strategically focus professional development to coincide with our instructional focus of providing targeted small group strategy lessons to improve student outcomes on specific areas of need based on the June Instructional Reports, ELA and Math State Test Analysis, Teacher Created Pre and Post Test Spreadsheets and classroom observations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of all teachers will participate in sustained and coherent professional development and be provided the opportunity to participate in collaborative committees in vertical and horizontal teams as measured by teacher attendance, meeting agendas, meeting minutes, classroom observations and an increase of at least 3% on teachers' response on the 2018-2019 NYCDOE school survey. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Create a professional development interest survey to On-Going Assistant Principal Teachers and staff 7/19-8/19 Principal assess teacher needs  Devise an on-going professional development calendar  Plan for differentiated professional learning  Create a professional development team Teachers and Staff Principal Assistant Principal Lead Teachers Grade Leaders Universal Literacy Coach Teachers 9/18-6/19 Assistant Principal   Schedule time for common planning for grade level teams Schedule congruence time for service providers to meet with classroom teachers to share best practices and strategies for Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners  Teacher team meetings weekly  Vertical team meetings with administration at least once per month.  Voluntary Lunch and Learns Parent Involvement/Engagement Parents/ 6/18-9/19 Principal Provide workshops on topics that impact student learning - understanding of CCLS/Next Generation, instructional shifts, curriculum bases assessments, standardized assessments, grade level expectations at Meet the Teacher, PTA Meetings, Principal Chats Provide guest speakers in regard to curriculum. Establish communication protocols between school and home. Provide materials and resources for parents. Provide support to families. SLT will meet to review goals and timelines. SLT minutes will be posted on bulletin board. SLT SLT Members Teachers 3 Trust: Teachers will meet and work in collaboration and in professional learning groups in order to discuss and align strategies leading to an environment of trust Teachers 9/18-6/19 All Teachers Assistant Principal Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to participate in classroom activities on a monthly basis, weekly calendar from principal, weekly email from parent coordinator, Tuesday parent conferences with teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Session  Teacher Team Planning Sessions Per Diem  For Coverage for staff to attend Professional Learning OTPS  Professional books Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 100% of teachers will show participation in collaborative teacher teams and horizontal and/or vertical professional learning experiences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Team meeting agendas and minutes, Advance data based on observation, teacher exit slips for professional learning, turn-key opportunities. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Due to language barriers, ELL students often struggle to seamlessly integrate into classroom activities. Advancement in our computer science program has provided a mechanism for ELL students to work at the same capacity as our non-ELL students. PS 31 has had the opportunity to be a pilot elementary school for the School Engineering Program (SEP, Jr.) and a 2018-2019 Computer Science Showcase. This had enabled our students to have access to advanced technology in the computer lab and in classrooms. Students were also given the choice, at lunchtime, of partaking in coding activities, at our Code Cafe, furthering the number of students exposed to coding and technology. ELL students can use technology to translate written materials into their native language in order to successfully work on the same materials at grade level thus increasing their success in reading and writing as evidenced by one year progress on the Teachers College Reading and Writing Benchmarks. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 100% of school leaders will support teachers in the integration of CS4All strategies in the classroom to improve their classroom instruction in the support of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities as measured by a one year increase on the Teachers College Writing Continuum and TCWRP Benchmark Assessments. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Administrators will attend CS4All Professional Development All Teachers and staff 9/18-6/19 Administrators, teachers  CS 4All LEAD Teachers and will provide on-going professional development in CS4All curriculum  Upper grade students will serve as Code Ambassadors to facilitate activities in the Code Cafe  Teachers will create units and activities to support computer science lessons  Technology specialist will provide support to classroom teachers in maintaining technology in the classrooms and in the Cafe  All teachers will be scheduled a technology assist period Teachers will incorporate Computer Science and lessons into classrooms' existing curriculum and utilize material provided by Computer Science for All Students 9/18-6/19 Teachers Integration of Computer Science Blueprints   Research on appropriate websites  Provide support in classrooms Student training and support   Code Ambassadors as Student Leaders  Parent workshops will be provided to share the CS4All program and will be given the opportunity to partner with school initiatives at home.  Parents will be invited to classroom activities and Saturday Hack-A-Thons  Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops with computer science lead teachers and present to SLT for feedback Parents On-going Teachers, Administrators and Parent Coordinator 6  N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administrators, teachers and parent coordinator will provide workshops on CS4All practice. Students will have at home access to on-line coding and Computer Science Based programs to share practices with families. Parents will be invited to monthly classroom challenges around Computer Science (plugged and unplugged). Visitors will be invited to visit and partake in Code Cafe activities once a month. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Attendance at workshops and culminating activities. -Outside agencies to provide professional workshops for teachers and parents.  -Funding for substitute teachers for attendance at outside workshops -Funding to build our technology resources for teachers, parents and students Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 All teachers and staff will have participated in at least three CS4All professional development workshops as evidenced by attendance sheets and feedback forms. Parents will have participated in at least one CS4All workshop as evidenced by sign-in sheets and feedback forms. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. February 2019, review student progress on TCRWP benchmarks and meeting criteria on reading and writing rubrics. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to our 2018 Framework for Great Schools Report 93% of families felt that they were involved in PS 31. Although that is a fairly high percentage we want all families to feel that they are an integral part of the PS 31 community. In order to achieve this goal we believe family events and activities that are non-language related will help Non English speaking families to be comfortable attending and volunteering. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of June 2019 parent involvement will increase from 93% to 95% based on the Framework for Great Schools Report. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent coordinator will plan new activities that all families can participate in regardless of language barriers. Families/ Staff Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator, Staff Family Fun Fridays   Coding with the Community at the Code Cafe  Walking club to promote healthy lifestyle  Continuation and organization of parent run school library Support of new incoming PTA Executive Board members   Creation of class-parent handbook - translated into dominant home languages Family STEAM night Local Precinct Workshops    Parent Safety Committee presence at morning drop off  Volunteer Breakfasts Engage parents in adult educational opportunities Staff/ On-going Parent Coordinator Families District Office  Creation of a PS 31 parent/teacher book club  Advertisement of District Calendar of Events/Trainings Parents/Guardians will be invited to visit classrooms once a month to engage in lessons with their children. Each classroom will be open for family members to be more that just a spectator but an interactive participant with their children. Staff/ Families One Friday per Month Teachers/Parent Coordinator/ Administration Formation of Fabulous Family Fridays   Parent coordinator blasts before each Fabulous Family Friday  Teachers will prepare lessons that lend themselves to family/child partnership work 9  Parent coordinator will discuss this event at Meet the Teacher in September so parents will have dates in advance  Parents will complete a feedback survey after each Friday 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Facebook  Email translated into dominant languages  Texts and Emails through School APP   Twitter  Backpacked letters in various translations  Parent volunteers to translate at events Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 50% of parents will have participated in a school meeting or event. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. As measured by school based surveys, attendance sign-in sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) TCRWP Benchmark Scores iReady Assessment ELA Exam Teacher Recommendation Mathematics EnVision Assessments iReady Assessment Math State Exam Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group During school Day One-to-one Before and After School Small Group One to One During the School Day Before and After School RTI services provided during the school day for 6 week intervals using Wilson/ Fundations as well as reinforcement of classroom strategies. In grades K-5 AIS Provided to grades K-5 before and after school using Benchmark ACT materials, Focus on Reading, Scholastic Guided Reading Short Reads Program Fundations and Wilsons, Readworks Students may work on iReady lessons at home RTI in 6 week intervals using Envisions reteach, Focus on Math, iReady grades K-5 AIS before and after School using, iReady, Focus on Math, and Teacher Created Materials 1  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher recommendation, NYS Science Exam, classroom assessments Teacher recommendation, Class Assessment Parent Request, Teacher Recommendation Non-fiction trade materials, Hot Topics Program, readworks, Foss, iRead Non-fiction trade books, Hot Topics, IReady Banana Splits No Place For Hate Socialization groups Small Group During the school day Small Group Small Group During the school Day During the school day 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) na 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. na Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3 We will use the funding to assist students who are in need of school supplies or clothing. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $675 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. na 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). na Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. na 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). na 5  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). na 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. na 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 6  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 31, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 31 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 8  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 9  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 31 ,in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. i s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 0  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 1  ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 2  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: This program will be offered to the following students: Current ELLs: Grade 3 - 13 Grade 4 - 8 Grade 5 - 11 Former ELLs: Grade 3 - 5 Grade 4 - 10 Grade 5 - 3 Totaling 50 students. Current and former English Language Learners will work in small groups in an after school program to provide additional support in the area of English Language Arts. Students will focus on reading fiction and non fiction literary texts leading to engagement in rich and rigorous, evidence based, conversations in support of the schools current school-wide instructional focus. According to ELA State Test data analysis, teacher feedback and conference notes and administrative observation English Language Learners need additional support in answering high-level, open ended questions. Participating in small group instruction, with grade appropriate, scaffolded support will help these students to participate in class at a higher level, and show at least one year's progress on State exams. 1 licensed ENL and 1 Common Branch teachers will plan and co- teach together to provide the maximum support in ESL strategies and reading/speaking strategies including - Socratic Seminar, Accountable Talk, Rotational Reading as well as addressing the following strategies: Reading: -close reading skills -vocabulary -cause and effect -main idea -inference -using context clues Writing: -informational writing -opinion writing 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The classes will be held after school for one hour on Wednesdays and Thursdays beginning January 4, 2019 and continuing through May 25, 2019. The students will attend both days and be grouped flexibly by grade and ability. ESL teachers will co teach with Common Branch teachers to provide targeted small group instruction. Materials supplemental to classroom materials will include: -Grade Level Trade Books -Teachers College Reading and Writing Materials -New York Ready ELA for grades 3, 4 and 5 -New York Ready Writing for grades 3, 4, and 5 -iReady for ELA and Math -Teacher Made Materials such as: Accountable Talk Prompts, Rubrics, and Graphic Organizers Teachers will be provided with attendance sheets to maintain records for the program. Students families will be contacted if the program is missed two times. Both ENL teacher and Content Area teachers will work with groups of students with no more than 10 in a class at a time. Students will attend in 6-8 week rotations - one group January and February and the other March and April. The program dates are as follows: Planning - at no cost to Title III December 19, 2018, December 20, 2018 Group 1 January 2, 2019, January 3, 2019, January 9, 2019, January 10, 2019, January 16, 2019, January 17, 2019, January 23, 2019, January 24, 2019 February 6, 2019, February 7, 2019, February 13, 2019, February 14, 2019, February 26, 2019, February 27 2019, February 28, 2019 Group 2 March 6, 2019, March 7, 2019, March 13, 2019, March 14, 2019, March 20, 2019, March 21, 2019, March 27, 2019, March 28, 2019 April 3, 2019, April 4, 2019, April 10, 2019, April 11, 2019, April 17, 2019, April 18, 2019 Translated notices will be sent home in December to invite students to the program. Translation will be done by the DOE translation service. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: ESL Common Core aligned strategies presented in workshops for all staff by 2 Certified ENL teachers as well as attendance at Borough offered workshops. Professional development will take place during structured professional development time on the following Mondays form 2:40 PM - 4:00 PM. ENL teachers will attend Borough Field Office Provided Professional 6  Part C: Professional Development Development as well Monday in house, on-going Professional Development around Common Core reading and writing strategies, Teachers College Methodology and Intervisit classroom in which the Instructional Focus is evident in practice. Mary Anne Gaudioso and Suann Yeres, certified ENL teachers will provide differentiated professional development to the PS 31 staff on the following topics: -Classroom Strategies for ELLs -Listening and Speaking Expectations -Integrating ELLs into Classroom Discussions Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents will be invited to attend workshops, determined by parent survey, before and after school and during parent engagement time on Tuesdays. Parents will be notified by letters backpacked with the children, postings on the school's eChalk website, (which can be translated by the click of a button), Facebook, Twitter and by email. These workshops will allow parents the opportunity to understand and assist their children in school wide curriculum used vertically throughout the school, as well as assisting their children in processes necessary for matriculation. Attendance will be monitored by sign-in sheets agendas and hand-outs ( translated by DOE Translation Services) prepared and collected by Martiza Gillespie, Parent Coordinator. Translation during workshops will be provided by parent coordinator and parent volunteers. Workshops (at no cost to program)will be planned and presented in collaboration with the ENL teachers, Mary Anne Gaudioso, Suann Yeres and Maritza Gillespie, Parent Coordinator. Workshops during the school day will include: -Middle School Adminssions - November 8, 2018 (1 hour) -Teachers College Reading and Writing Program - November 13, 2019 (1 hour) -Test taking strategies - ELA - January 15, 2019 (1.5 hours) -Test taking stategies - Math - January 22, 2019 (1.5 hours) -Moving up to the next grade - May 2019 (1 hour) 7 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per session for after school program for 4 teachers 30 days of service @ 60.65 per session rate na Materials for Title III ONLY $599 for Benchmark Reading Materials $1500 iReady books to match to technology program $1562 for Leveled Trade Books $1724 for iReady Subscription na na Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $7419.60  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff na and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $3562.32 $1624 na $12,366 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 26 School Name The Bayside School Borough Queens School Number 031 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mrs. Terri Graybow Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher MaryAnne Gaudioso Teacher/Subject Area Diana LoPiccolo Teacher/Subject Area Anne-Marie Songco Related-Service Provider Lara Africk Superintendent Danielle Giunta Assistant Principal Mr. Tony Kossovitsas Coach N/A School Counselor Aimee Serfaty Parent Kelly Rodriquez Parent Coordinator Maritza Gillespie Field Support Center Staff Member Yazmin Torres Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 555 9 Total number of ELLs 70 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.61%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At P.S. 31 we use numerous tools to assess early literacy skills of our English Language Learners. Our school uses Fountas and Pinnell and TCRWP, (Teachers College Reading and Writing Project). TCRWP helps us to assess the proper reading levels for our students on the independent level and for guided reading levels. Fountas and Pinnell allows teachers to assess students in reading for decoding and fluency. In Kindergarten through Grade 2, we also use the additional assessments to assess letter/sound recognition, sight words, phonics, phonemic awareness and early literacy behaviors. In addition, we have students produce on-demand writing prompts for Informational, Narrative, and Opinion writing. Afterwards the writing samples are reviewed by the grade team to determine strengths/weaknesses and next steps. Both assessment tools help our teachers gain better insight in lesson planning for our ELL population. Our school has incorporated many web-based educational programs which allows all students to gain access to. We encourage different websites for different learning styles. Students have access to Google Apps for Education, Google Classroom, Google Translate, I-Ready,(a website based reading and math assessment), Pearson Realize, News ELA, Scratch ( Coding with 0  Translation Tools), DuoLingo which is language acquisition, Code.org (coding with translation tools and Wonder and Blockly Apps. Wonder allows students and non English speaking students to create coding and programs to make robots move and become mobile. Wonder codes the way a student thinks. Wonder makes robotics a great experience for all students! There are student libraries customized by lexile measures. Students have daily progress monitoring in-text questions that are aligned with the standards. This assessment informs the staff of specific individual literacy skills that need work. Students lexiles are updated as needed based on their student assessment performance. I-ready is a K-12 adaptive diagnostic reading/math program aligned with the common core. I-ready pinpoints student needs down to the sub-skill level and shows progress monitoring to determine whether students are on track. It also provides personalized student instruction that targets each ELLs unique area of need. At P.S. 31 our ELLs tend to fall below their grade level peers in both reading and writing. In Kindergarten, all students are currently reading pre-emergent story books and beginning to read level A books, at this time 7 kindergarten ELLs currently do not know all of their letters and sounds. The current benchmark in 1st grade is level F/G, 11 ELLs are currently below level F/G. In grade 2, level J,K,L is the current benchmark, 12 ELLs are currently reading below level. In grade 3, level N is the current benchmark, 2 ELLs are below level N. In grade 4, level Q is the current grade level benchmark, 5 ELLs are currently below level Q. In grade 5, level T is current grade level benchmark, 5 ELLs are currently below level T. ELL students will have ongoing assessments to ensure they are progressing toward grade level standards. This data is used to form groups of students for Title III programs, RTI, and for classroom and ESL services. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our instructional planning helps to support our assessments that are mentioned above, (Fountas and Pinnell), and (TCRWP). All classrooms have leveled student libraries, including ENL classrooms, all classroom teachers administered running records throughout the year to monitor students' progress. All staff members are trained in TCRWP. In grades 1-5, students are periodically assessed in I-Ready. For all of our web based programs, students have access to mulitlple technological resources such as, our computer lab, student IPAD's, Smart Boards, laptops, and robots to program them to become mobile. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? P.S. 31 is constantly self-evaluating its ENL program to ensure its ELLs are provided with all the tools needed to show success and to meet the grade level Common Core standards. Our goal is to ensure rigourous instruction that is aligned with the core curriculum, create an effective plan for professional development, to give support to teachers and school instructional specialists in implementing best practices in the classroom, comply with the language allocation policies and improve communication with parents and families of ELLs students. Using summative assessments, such as the NYSESLAT helps us to see growth in our program. We aim to increase the number of advanced and proficient ELL's and to decrease the number of beginner and intermediate ELL's. Our school is dedicated to increasing ELL's reading levels by showing one year of growth annually. After reviewing the NYSESLAT results and analyzing reading levels, we evaluate the progress of our students to further develop our curriculum and utilize the common core standards. NYSITELL scores help us to identify current student levels as from CR Part 154 requirements for English as a new language. Another summative assessment that is utilized is the NYS math and ELA tests that are administered to grades 3-5. The results of these assessments are analyzed by our school data team. The team then interprets the data and develops small target groups to focus on specific topics and areas in need. I-ready, an online reading and math assessment is given K-5. This computer-based program has the capacity to sort data and enables staff to see each child's strengths and weakness. This is beneficial in creating small groups based on similiar areas of need for both RTI, and ENL planning. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 1  We administer yearly NYSESLAT testing, and NYSITELL testing for all English language learners. Other summative assessments include, New York State Mathematics and ELA tests. The school data team discusses the findings with the staff during professional development. The administration also meets with the Queens Borough North data specialists to asses data and plan for future instruction. Our summative assessments are tools to help us evaluate the effectiveness of our ENL program. These results also allow us to set program goals, improve goals, align our curriculum. Our data helps us at the classroom level to make instructional adjustments and interventions during the learning process. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our goal at P.S. 31 is to provide our ELLs with a rigorous and culturally responsive RTI model. We strive to better serve ELLs who are at-risk for academic difficulties by using data from our RTI team to guide instruction for English Language Learners. Both the classroom teacher and ENL Teacher analyze student achievement in the classroom (Tier 1) and try to improve core instruction. Specifically, we take into account if: - Students’ cultural and linguistic backgrounds are taken into consideration when planning instruction to support language development, content learning, and knowledge building. - ELLs are provided with opportunities to work in pairs and small groups, to further develop their language skills and to apply their knowledge. - The ELL students’ understanding is routinely checked and provided with opportunities to demonstrate their understanding in a variety of ways, including their native language. - Key terms, words, idioms, and phrases that ELLs need to learn are explicitly taught and clearly displayed. Students are moved into Tier 2 and Tier 3 if they demonstrate a need for more targeted and intensive academic support. Our team starts with a universal screening process. If an ELL student is flagged as at-risk or below-benchmark on a particular skill, the student receives targeted instructional support from their classroom teacher to bolster development in a given area. This support is delivered in coordination with ELL services. Instruction varies across group size, frequency and duration of intervention, and level of training of the professionals providing instruction or intervention. These services and interventions are provided in small-group settings in addition to instruction in the general curriculum. Students who continue to show too little progress at this level of intervention are then considered for more intensive interventions as part of Tier 3. During the Tier 3 intensive intervention, instruction is given by ELL teachers and in addition, by our RTI teacher. We continuously monitor progress from our ELL's and then we make educational decisions about changes in goals, instruction and services. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSITELL results are for our new admits and therefore reflect the students' current level during this school year. As educators we use students’ NYSESLAT scores to help determine which instructional standards to focus on, and to evaluate our program. We analyze the NYSESLAT to find the students' English proficiency level, in addition we review each student's raw scores for each of the NYSESLAT's four sub-tests: listening, speaking, reading and writing to determine our instructional plans. Using the data from the NYSESLAT we compared test scores over the past two years and have seen growth across the school. We refer to the EDAT report, we look for the student's attendance, hold over status, long term ELL status, SWD's, and NYSESLAT scores. We meet and discuss what modifications should be made, if applicable. Students will continue to receive English as a New Language (ENL) until their scores on the NYSESLAT show that they are totally proficient in the English language and attend all English classes. We also use NYSESLAT scores to help determine which instructional standards we must focus on and to evaluate our program. The NYS ELA/MATH/Science assessments further assist us in evaluating our current ELL program. Our schools data team reviews test scores to help with placement in targeted small group instruction and before and after school programs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The main goal of dissemination is to share with others the knowledge our assessments have produced. First, we contact the general education teachers to share with them the test results of the NYSESLAT/NYSITELL. Each teachers is presented with their ELLs proficiency levels (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding). Once their proficiency level is 2  indicated the type and amount of English language support given to each ELL student is determined to maintain productively in the grade-level content-area classroom. Our ELL students who score at the highest proficiency level of Commanding on the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT has met the linguistic demands necessary to meet the state standards with minimal support. The Commanding student has exited ELL status and is no longer considered an English Language Learner. However, is entitled to additional support. In an effort to meet the linguistic needs of all parents we send letters in their home language indicating the results of both the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT. We have Parent meetings every Tuesday afternoon and ELL Parent Orientations every month to update parents on their child's progress. In addition, teachers run and access data and we discuss what strategies can be implemented to address each child's needs. We further evaluate the results and modify if needed. Every Monday the staff meets for professional development, where the test results for all standardized tests are examined and reviewed by all teachers. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. PS 31Q provides instruction to English Language learners through both a Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ENL program. Both models enable high-level instruction in order for ELLs to acquire English Language needs for success in the core content areas. We use a combined Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ENL model to ensure maximum efficiency and to comply with the mandated minutes required for proficiency level. We place students heterogeniously in each class or group. There are two full-time teachers who hold certifications in both TESOL as well as Common Branch. In order to service all ELL's, students are grouped heterogeneously by grade, the maximum grade span for grouping students is 2 continuous grades as per CR Part 154.2, however we try to group within the grade when possible. All ENL instruction is provided during the school day. We are careful when planning to ensure that ELLs are not taken out during core classes to receive services. Our stand-Alone ENL instruction is held in a ENL classroom where it is the ENL teacher with the ELL students. our Integrated ENL is for ELLs of all levels of English proficiency. It is provided in the ELL students' grade-level general education classroom. In this model, the ENL teacher and classroom teacher will co-teach during ELA or a content area class. The ENL teacher will work closely with the classroom teacher to provide language support during classroom instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students within our Freestanding ENL program are taught in English using ENL methodologies and research-based best practices for a specific amount of time per week as determined by either their NYSITELL or their New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) scores, and in accordance to Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 (CR 154). 3  These regulations require that students, grades K-5, who score at the Entering /Beginning level will receive a total of 360 minutes, 180 minutes in standalone ENL and up into 180 integrated ENL/ELA. For emerging students, we give 360 minutes of instruction, 90 minutes in Standalone ENL and 180 integrated ENL/ELA. For transitioning or intermediate ELL's, they receive 180 minutes of ENL/ELA or other content area. For Expanding students we give 180 minutes but 90 minutes are ENL and 90 minutes is ELA instruction. For all ELLs who have passed the NYSESLAT we continue to support this group by providing Proficient students, 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction. All ELL's are programmed into STARS and are serviced as per the mandated number of instructional minutes which is mandated from CR Part 154 Requirements. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area subjects, such as reading, math, science and social studies are taught to ELL's in conjunction with NYS Common Core Learning Standards. Other subject areas are intertwined into these lessons in order to ensure cross-curricular connections and an interdisciplinary approach. Additionally, literacy units of study have been created, using the Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project Units of Study on all grade levels as well with specific age-appropriate, standards-driven genres as focal points. Such units of study are taught in conjunction with the content area units (via a Balanced Literacy approach and using the Workshop Model) in order to ensure the strongest connections possible. All instruction is giving in English, with Native Language support, when needed. Our ENL teachers are highly trained in making content comprehensible in order to support language development. Some key components of making core content comprehensible are: - Stating clear language and content objectives - Building background knowledge - Scaffolding techniques, such as - think-alouds, paraphrasing, partnering, - Variety of question types - blooms taxonomy - Interaction - groups and discussions - Practice/Application - hands on material - Review/Assessment - review vocabulary, content word wall, give student feedback, teacher or self assessment 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Since we do not have a bilingual or dual language program here, our students are evaluated in their native languages during initial screening during the interview and through the Spanish LAB. To aid in the transference of language abilities, students are always encouraged to continue to speak in their respective native languages at home. Our bilingual libraries are there to support the children and their families. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) are those who come from a home in which a language other than English is spoken and enter a school within the United States after Grade Two. Students within this sub population must have had at least two consecutive years less schooling than their peers and as a result, function well below expected grade levels (by at least two years) in reading and mathematics. Some SIFE students may be pre-literate in their native language. They lack a strong foundation of the school readiness skills, sociolinguistic proficiencies and academic knowledge demonstrated by students who have consistently attended school. To assist these students it is imperative that as educators we give enriched, holistic instruction and tape into their prior knowledge and interests, giving them opportunities to succeed. At this time we do not have any SIFE students. However, P.S. 31 has a team of educators specifically to address the needs of SIFE students. This team includes the ENL 4  teachers and coordinators, guidance counselors, RTI teacher, social workers and any other educators who will be serving this student. The team obtains information on their former schooling, interests and family background. A parent interview gathers information on students’ educational background, family and social history. Then a rigorous and tailored ENL program is implemented that draws upon the student’s cultural and academic backgrounds. Intervention will be implemented to incorporate best practices in ENL methodologies, while building background knowledge and literacy skills. When possible, technological support (i.e. computer assisted instruction) would be an integral part of the student's day-to-day instruction. Instruction is designed to have multiple entry points for students of all levels and provide opportunities for independent practice and increased levels of student engagement. b. Students within the Newcomer sub population are new to school within the United States and fall within service years 0-3. Some newcomers may have received adequate schooling in their native country and as a result, may be working at grade level. Those that are not, typically catch up academically due to working with an ESL provider. Other Newcomers may have had limited schooling in their native country or experienced minor interruptions. Therefore, these students have limited native language literacy skills. Newcomers are given targeted instruction focusing on phonics and the acquisition of new vocabulary.Teachers use various teaching strategies such as: choral reading, read and sing-alongs, Total Physical Response, word games, visuals and props, Thinking Maps and other Graphic Organizers, environmental print, along with online resources and appropriate ipad applications. We set up Newcomers with "buddies", other ESL students speaking the same language, to make this transition smoother. ENL teacher's further support the linguistic needs of the these students. Newcomers receive instruction with the best practices and ESL methodologies. Our Newcomers receive direct phonics instruction through Fundations or Words Their Way. As well as providing our classroom and school libraries with bilingual texts that represent the primary languages spoken within our classroom and school. c. ELLs who are in the Developing subgroup of English Language Learners are those students who have been receiving services within the 4-6 years and who struggle with English acquisition. These students are typically not performing on grade level and qualify to receive extra support through our at-risk services and additional ENL periods when available. These ELLs may not perform as well on standardized tests. Some experience difficulties in all content areas. As a result, they require a great deal of instructional support to prevent them from becoming Long-Term ELLs. Developing ELLS are offered additional teaching periods to focus on their specific needs. The classroom teachers pulls small groups and works on reading comprehension skills, math problem solving, academic vocabulary and Wilson /Fundations. The ENL teachers provide periods of instruction above and beyond their required units of service to help students reach grade level standards. Our school also offers After-school tutorial programs (AIS) and uses Title III funding to help assist long term ELLs .Instruction is tailored to meet their specific needs. Action Plans and Goals are developed for each small groups that draw upon their strengths, but that address their specific areas of weakness and challenges. There are ongoing reviews of these Action Plans and Goals for each student to show progress within a small group. Long-term ELLs will continue to receive targeted interventions based upon their immediate needs via AIS/RTI and during after school. Additionally, Wilson/Fundations(research-based, multi-sensory reading and writing program that directly teaches the structure of words in the English language) is used by several classroom teachers and AIS staff to teach these students. d. Long-Term ELLs are students who have received schooling beyond 6 years of service. Students falling within this category often are able to speak English, but may not have the CALP to succeed academically. Nearly all Long-Term ELLS are below grade level in reading and writing, and continue to need ESL services in order to acquire academic English. Our Long-Term ELLs are offered 5  additional teaching periods, if available, to focus on their specific language needs. The classroom teachers pulls small groups and works on reading comprehension skills, math problem solving, academic vocabulary and Wilson/Fundations. The ESL teachers provide periods of instruction above and beyond their required units of service to help students reach grade level standards. Our school also offers After-school tutorial programs (AIS) and uses Title III funding to help assist long term ELLs . e. Former ELLs are students who have sufficient academic English language proficiency as measured by the NYSESLAT exam, and are able to function in a mainstream setting now have the additional support of an ESL provider. They receive continued intergrated ESL support .5 units (90mins) weekly, during the school day as well as, after school programs. Former ELL's are also entitled to the same modifications on New York State exams afforded to students who are currently enrolled in our ENL program. Whenever possible, RTI teachers continue to work with these students to ease their transition. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Once an ELL is identified as having special needs, students with this group receive services to support not only their documented disabilities, but their language acquisition needs as well. The School based support team tests ELL's in their native language, then the student is seen by our related service providers who provide them with the necessary services as per each student's IEP. Teachers collaborate to determine the best possible educational strategies including: modifying grade-level content standards if necessary, scaffolding content vocabulary, using pictures clues, using graphic organizers and thinking maps, and partner work with accountable talk, allowing extra processing time for all 4 modalities. Our school has been incorporationg technology into classrooms annually to assist ELLs with disablilities, specifically ipads, laptops, and smartboards. Technology has proven to be highly engaging for students. PS 31 is a SEP Junior school and prides itself with the latest technology available to our students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At P.S. 31,Q we strive to meet the needs of our ELL-SWD's by modifying curriculum, providing flexible scheduling, and targeting instruction to achieve all IEP goals while also meeting their English language needs. Our school makes every attempt to provide native language resources to fill subject matter and conceptual language gaps. We also provide all teachers of ELLs with academic language and literacy professional development. All ELLs are provided with test accommodations for English-learner students as well as any additional modifications such as taking the test in native language, test read, scribe, additional time, separate location, etc. Through assessment, conferring, instruction and groupings, students are re-evaluated regularly and if required (based on student need/growth), scheduling can be altered. Our Special needs ELLs are mainstreamed into art, computer, gym, music, alongside with their non-disabled peers. Our school is dedicated to reaching every students academic needs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our intervention programs are set within the academic areas of ELA and Mathematics for all ELL subgroups. The intent of these programs is to help our students meet and/or exceed the Common Core Learning Standards. Our goal, however, is to place special focus on our ELL population in order to maximize their English language acquisition, and to assist them in achieving the state-designated level of English proficiency for their grade. Our emerging and transitioning groups are offered, The Response to Intervention at P.S. 31 focuses on students, including Expanding ELL's who are struggling in both Math, English Language Arts, and the content areas. This is a 3 tier process in which students are assessed and teaching is targeted to their weaknesses. Each tier is approximately 6 weeks long and if there is not progress the student is then referred for an evaluation to special education. We also offer Academic intervention Services before/after-school which focus on ELA/Math test sophistication skills for Expanding and Commanding ELL's. All ELL's in grades 3-5 are offered a Title III after school program where ELA/Math are taught to small groups. Additionally, our school's intervention services include: SETSS, Speech, and Guidance at risk, are open for all ELL's. In the 6  classroom, teachers pull small groups of students to develop content in both Science and Social Studies. Our PTA supports academic success in science by funding a special program called Flight: Rocket launching, where all 5 th grade students using a hands-on approach to learning built and launched rockets in the schoolyard for all English language learner levels. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, our staff will be working on improving student comprehension by integrating vocabulary work on a daily basis throughout our school. This will be done through school wide word of the week and follow up activities in each classroom. Daily vocabulary lessons will be reinforced in the ENL classroom as well. In addition, our school is participating in Teachers College, Writing Workshop training. Over the past two years the staff has participated in professional development in reading and writing using Heinemann Units of Study. This year however, staff members from every grade are attending professional development at Colombia University: Teachers College, in writing. This school wide movement is in response to students showing increasing difficulty in writing. Another focus will be to continue training the staff with Tier 1 RTI pre-referral intervention strategies using the guide book PRIME as a main tool. RTI represents an important educational strategy to close achievement gaps for all students, including at-risk students, students with disabilities, and English language learners. In an RTI process, a student who is struggling receives additional instructional support provided by matching instruction to a student’s individual needs through a multi-tier instructional model. Additionally, our school will be focusing on using our data driven spread sheets to actively plan skill-specific lessons based on each child"s individual needs. The Internet based IReady program is used as both benchmark and ongoing progress monitoring of achievement in reading and math and assists us in generating useful data for each student, including ELLs and Former ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL's have equal access to all programs here at P.S.31. We offer supplemental services to ELL's after school (AIS), before or after school, or our Title III program, and our response to intervention initiative. Various in school programs are offered to the entire school population, including English language learners. All ELL students may participate in our Arts Programs including Band, Chorus, and the Annual School Play. All ELL students may participate in our Sports Programs such as Basketball Team and Cheerleader Squad. Our parent coordinator ensures that letters are distributed from P.S. 31 inviting all ELLs to participate in our various activities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. P.S. 31 supports our English language learners with high quality and rigorous instruction to met the common core standards. Many different materials are used to support our ELL population including: computers, books on cd's, Ipads, and interactive smartboards. We also subscribe to periodicals such as Time for Kids, National Geographic, and Scholastic News and Story works to align with Common Core Standards. Math and Science core studies utilize manipulatives for kinesthetic and visual learners. In addition our Math and ELA curriculums have ESL components which allow for differentiation for our ELLs in their classrooms. These materials support different learning styles and multiple intelligences as new information and concepts will be presented. Our school attempts to support ELLs education by providing, when possible, native language materials to newcomers. In addition, our school has incorporated many web-based educational programs which allow all students to gain access to. We encourage different websites for different learning styles. Students have access to Google Apps for education, Google classroom, Google Translate, IReady, Pearson Realize, NewsELA, Scratch ( Coding with Translation Tools). DuoLingo which is language acquisition, Code.org (coding with translation tools and Wonder Blockly apps. Wonder allows students to create coding and programs to make robots move. Wonder makes robotics a great experience for all students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 7  Native language support is given to all English language learners in our school in the following forms: bilingual dictionaries and content-area glossaries; computer tools and apps, trade books in the students' native languages; native peer partnerships; staff members who can speak to some of our ELL's in their native tongue. Our classrooms and school library contain bilingual texts that represent the primary languages in our school. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All services and resources provided to our ELL's correspond to their ages and grade levels. After reviewing and analyzing data Including NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, ELA, Math, Science, standardized tests, grade tests, informal assessments during common grade level meetings, students are grouped together by grade level and subgrouped, at times, by proficiency level, however these groups are flexible. This allows instruction to be delivered corresponding to students' grade curriculum and standards. Math and ELA curriculums have ESL components with differentiated lesson activities for reinforcement of concepts for our ELL's. In addition all classrooms libraries have leveled books which are matched to each individual's independent reading level. Ongoing assessments are further reviewed to determine if the ELLs are reaching their goals, showing improvement, and are used for flexible grouping. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S. 31 supports our English language learners with high quality and rigorous instruction to met state standards. Many different materials are used to support our ELL population including: computers, books on cd's, ipads, and interactive smartboards. We also subscribe to periodicals such as Time for Kids, National Geographic, and Scholastic News and Storyworks to align with Common Core Standards. Math and Science core studies utilize manipulatives for kinesthetic and visual learners. In addition our Math and ELA curriculums have ENL components which allow for differentiation for our ELLs in their classrooms. These materials support different learning styles and multiple intelligences as new information and concepts will be presented. Our school attempts to support ELLs education by providing, when possible, native language materials to newcomers. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). To assist our newly enrolled ELL students, P.S. 31 offers many activities with the purpose of assisting newcomer students and their families. For example parents are provided opportunities to tour the building, meet staff and administrators, and meet new parents, all communicated bilingually if necessary. Visits include classrooms, cafeteria, library, offices, etc. Our school also offers a School Orientation for both parents and students prior to the beginning of school. This is a time when PS 31 teachers, administration, parent coordinator, school guidance counselor and PTA president have an open forum in which they inform new parents about various parent related interests such as PTA, various fundraisers, Multicultural Days, various celebrations, school procedures like bus and lunch and much more. Our active PTA is a diverse group of parents and teachers who are involved fostering the home-school connection. Since communication is a critical component of parent involvement, our school maintains a frequently updated website and corresponds with families via email. The ESL parent orientation is a perfect opportunity for parents to meet other parents that speak the same native language and whom are also new to our school. These meetings are ongoing over the course of the year. We also recommend language programs to students and parents that are held locally in the community. Our school offers a variety of workshops to keep parents apprised of school expectations and other relevant topics. Our school encourages families to attend social events such as Family Night, which is an enjoyable carnival held both inside and outside the building. Also several times a year there is a Movie Night, Family Zumba, Field day in June and School Spirit Week where children and staff dress up with a different theme everyday! Throughout the school year, ELL's are offered the following enrichment and extra-curricular activities: Ballroom Dance, Chorus, Keyboard, Field Day, Class plays, After-School play which is The Drama Club, AIS, and Title III. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? n/a 18. For schools with dual language programs: 8  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. Professional development is an ongoing process and a key component of helping our students succeed. All teachers participate in varying professional development opportunities throughout the school year. ESL workshops are generally attended out of the building and are usually given by the Office of English Language Learners. This year we expect multiple opportunities to engage in professional learning on implementing the Common Core Learning Standards. (These workshop offerings are disseminated to schools as they become available, therefore a comprehensive list of them cannot be included here. ) Whenever applicable, teachers turn-key the information to staff during monthly faculty and/or grade conferences. These meetings support both classroom teachers and paras by giving them ENL strategies for their ELL's while helping the staff who need to meet the mandated 7.5 hours of ELL training. The NYC Department of English Language Learners and Student Support offers multiple resources including high quality professional development series, Common Core-aligned lesson samples and documents, an ever-growing video library, and RTI Resources for Teachers of ELLs. Currently, our ENL teachers are attending 2 ongoing workshops offered by Queens North Borough Field Support Center. The first is a series of 3 workshops called The Nuts and Bolts of ELL Related Topics and Regulations which provides an overview of regulations that govern ELL education, demographic, and performance information. The second workshop is given monthly throughout the school year and is called Professional Learning for ELLs; the topics explored are academic vocabulary, text complexity, scaffolding strategies, RTI and other relevant topics. ELL personnel/teachers then turnkey the information from these meetings to the staff including school psychologist, secretaries, parent coordinator, and speech therapists. Additionally, the classroom teachers receive Professional Development where handouts are given on various topics, ex) ELL Strategies to use in your Classroom, Planning Units with ELLs in mind, etc. One of the best ways to continue to be knowledgeable is through engagement in ongoing professional development and conversations during grade level meetings/planning days, weekly lab sites, periodic professional development days, professional reading, and through the turn-keying of information acquired while attending workshops and seminars outside of the school. Professional development has become a part of our school community. Our teachers have a number of opportunities available to develop themselves professionally. Through these professional opportunities, members of our entire staff participate in a number of activities from viewing and discussing high-quality teaching, engaging in thematic grade level planning, reviewing best practices/teaching methodologies (including ESL) and differentiated learning via study groups. In addition to the professional training outlined in question #1, our staff training in the Common Core has been ongoing. All of our literacy and math units have been fully aligned to the Common Core Standards. While planning units and lessons, we review the common core standards associated with the unit, often times referring to student work that meets the standards. ENL staff is a part of the unit and lesson planning sessions on how to meet the needs of all students (including ELLs). See above, question 1 for specific topics on professional development related to ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 9  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Staff support in assisting ELL's as they transition from elementary to middle school is provided through collaborative planning. The ENL teachers at PS 31 meet with classroom teachers to discuss the needs of each graduating ELL and to determine best practices for assisting these students with their transition. The graduating students attend middle school orientation in June where they take a tour of their new school and meet with the principal and staff. During the orientation students have the opportunity to meet with middle school teachers and ask questions about the middle school environment. CR Part 154.2 requires a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers. With a focus dedicated to language acquisition, specifically best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners. English as a Second Language teachers have a minimum of 50% of the required professional development hours designated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners. This prescribed percentage also applies to the required 175 hours of new teacher training. The entire staff receives training in ENL strategies and methodologies in the classroom, data analysis of all ELL related test scores, BICS/CALP and the stages of language development, as well as the NYSESLAT, as well as NYSESLAT data analysis. The administration believes that familiarizing the staff with the NYSESLAT (Reading, Writing, Listening, and Speaking) will assist all teachers in good standards based literacy instruction, specific strategies and approaches to use with newcomer ELLs. Agendas and attendance are maintained by presenters to track hours. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During extended day on Tuesdays, teachers communicate with parents via phone conferences, email or in person meetings to discuss the goals of both the program and student progress. If appropriate, interpretation services are provided via telephone conference calls or in person, if available. At this time the ENL teacher discusses with the parent ways they can help support their child's learning at home, we set goals for the student, and review their classroom work and assessments with the parent. Written translations of important notices are provided through the DOE Unit. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. During our weekly meetings with parents during our Tuesday Parental Involvement we schedule appointments or phone conferences with ELL parents. We maintain an ongoing log/and sign in sheet. P.S 31 believes that parental involvement is key to every child's success. We encourage parents to volunteer and our school promotes an open door policy. Parents are encouraged to participate and become actively involved in their child’s learning processes and academic life. To this end, both classroom teachers and ENL teachers coordinate activities throughout the school year to ensure parental involvement. Parents are invited to attend our "Meet the Teacher" night. This gives parents a chance to become familiar with the school environment and meet their child's teacher in an informal setting. Parents are also invited to attend our "Open House" week during which parents are able to observe and participate in their child's learning both in the ENL class and in his/her regular class. In addition parents are invited and encouraged to attend: monthly class performances, trips, special lessons, and most importantly, Parent-Teacher conferences during which they can discuss their child's progress. Interpreters are present at these events to further enhance communication with parents of ELL's. Parents are also encouraged to attend PS 31’s PTA meetings and are informed of adult ENL classes being given at various schools within the community. A variety of workshops are offered throughout the school year to keep parents/guardians apprised of upcoming events, and strategies that parents can implement to support their child's academic achievement. Our parent coordinator is actively involved during all parental meetings, activities, and is always accessible to the parent by assisting them in communicating with any language needs. 0  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Terri Graybow, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Bayside School School DBN: 26Q031 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Terri Graybow Title Principal Tony Kossovitsas A.P. Assistant Principal Maritza Gillespie Parent Coordinator MaryAnne Gaudioso/ENL ENL/Bilingual Teacher Kelly Rodriguez Parent Diana LoPiccolo/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Anne-Marie Songco Teacher/Subject Area None None Coach Coach Aimee Serfaty-Guidance School Counselor Danielle Giunta Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Lara Africk Other SETSS Teacher N/A N/A Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 10/02/17 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 26Q031 School Name: P.S. 31Q Superintendent: Danielle Giunta The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Maryann Gaudioso ESL Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 31 will be providing our entire staff with training to ensure they fully understand their responsibility to offer translation and interpretation support to parents. Our school runs several ATS reports, such as the UPPG, RPOB, and RHLA, to identify and ensure the language needs of our parents are meet. Additionally, this year we will be training a staff member who will be responsible for coordinating language access for parents. This staff member will be trained to monitor parent language needs, identifying school staff who are qualified to provide interpretation, allocating funds to provide language assistance and informing parents as to the varying language assistance available at our school. When parents register their child they complete the HLIS with the assistance of a trained staff member, their language preference is noted and our school makes every effort to communicate with parents in their preferred language. 4  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language P.S. 31's parents preferred languages include English, Chinese-Cantonese/Mandarin, Korean, Greek, Spanish, Urdu, Arabic, Albanian, Polish, Russian, Bengali, and Japanese. Although, many of these parents have put down both English and their first language as preferred. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All parents were given access to our PS 31Q website which gives them a full calendar and announcements of events which can be translated into their preferred language via Google Translate. Each teacher has a page which gives dates and homework assignments, trips, test dates and projects that can all be translated. Parents of ELLs receive all notices in their preferred languages during registration as well as viewing a video in their preferred language during our parent orientation. Annually letters are sent home informing parents of ELLs about their child's NYSESLAT test scores and their placement in our ESL program. There are also informative 5  English Language Learner pamphlets that explain the three program selection choices in numerous languages. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school In addition, to parent-teacher conferences and workshops and Meet the Teacher Night, our Tuesday Parent Involvement Day provides parents with full translation of their child's progress, either in person or via phone conferences. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS 31,Q ensures that Limited English Speaking parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education. 6  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The parent coordinator works hand in hand with parents to gather feedback by phone conversations, in person conferences and parent surveys that are distributed during monthy PTA meetings.The parent coordinator will set up a focus group of parents including all cultures and languages that represent our school. The purpose of this focus group is to gather feedback and make suggestions on how to improve parent/school communication. 7 
