 27Q047 School Name: P.S. 047 CHRIS GALAS Principal: HEATHER LORENZ   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Chris Galas 342700010047 3K-8 9 Power Road 718-634-7167 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 27Q047 718-945-5394 Fax: Heather Lorenz Hlorenz@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Heather Lorenz Rose Hannon Ruth Nocerino Kim Palmese Marcy Nussbaum n/a n/a n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: JenniferAmbert Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd, Ozone Park NY 11416 jambert@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address:   718-642-5800 718-642-5705 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd., Ozone Park, NY 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: Mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-522-7133 Phone Number: 718-391-6161 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Heather Lorenz Rose Marie Hannon Ruth Nocerino n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Marcy Nussbaum Jessica Urcelay JerilynKelly Teacher Teacher Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Irene Dana Helen Arena Jessica Mertz Danielle Steiner n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Paraprofessional Parent Parent Parent n/a n/a Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At PS 47, we believe that student achievement is the result of the continued dedication and collaboration of the staff, administration and parents. An advantage to our small size is the ability of the students to be known well by all adults in the school. Our mission is to ensure that every student is engaged in challenging tasks while creating classrooms that are supportive and encouraging. The teachers, including our guidance counselor and social worker, continually work on maintaining a Respect for All environment each day.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 47 is a small and nurturing school. Our School enrolls 246 students in grades 3K-8. 23.17% of our students are students with IEPs, 1.35% are considered ENL students. For 2018-2019 school year, our data report has 100% of students with standard promotional criteria receiving a 2 or higher on the NYS Exam. PS 47 exceeded the target in all areas including Student Progress, Student Achievement, Student Proficiency and School Environment. Our schools instructional focus is as follows: Students will continue to demonstrate an understanding of the question or prompt from a literary or informational text by supporting their answers with analysis, research and reflection in their writing. This goal has adapted over the past few years as we continue to meet our expectations each year. We ensure that students are able to achieve this goal through the structures we have in place both inside and outside the classroom. Last year we adopted the Teacher's College Writing Project. The teachers have made great strides in creating a seamless incorporation of CCLS with a highly structured and rigorous curriculum. We follow the Danielson Framework to guide our professional learning to raise our teacher practice to highly effective. Our goal is for our teachers to identify their own strengths and needs in their practice through effective feedback and continually work on perfecting their craft. In addition, this year we have added in the Teacher's College Reading to compliment our writing program. For the school year 2018-2019, PS 47 has opted into having the grade 8 students take the Algebra and Science Regents. We believe that our students are capable of passing the regents and will increase our competitive edge with other middle schools. We have also opted for 3K for All initiative. This focus on early childhood education and child play will again increase our competitive edge to increase our enrollment and make our school a true neighborhood school. Each classroom is equipped with the newest technology. We incorporate Lenovo laptops for research and note taking in grades Prek-5 and MacBook and Air Laptops for grades 6-8, as well as the flat panel smartboards to create interactive learning within the curriculum. We have numerous packages with online sites such as Brainpop, myON, and ThinkCentral. The Administrative team continuously communicates the high expectations they have to the staff. Each teacher meets with the administration in the beginning of the year and discusses their individual goals and the strategies and plans for contributing to the school’s instructional focus. Teachers meet in teams to evaluate the Danielson Framework and set their goals around specific domains and components that will make them highly effective especially in components 3b- Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques and 3d-Using Assessment in Instruction. This year we are continuing to focus on the component 1E- Designing Coherent Instruction as a main focus again due to the new curriculum. The administration participates in all professional learning opportunities to maintain their expertise in instruction. Our goals reflect the need to organize strategies to increase the level of thinking and engagement for all students. Through various instructional decisions and techniques we look to refine our practices through the following learning opportunities: Socratic circles   Text talk time  Research classes  Teacher's College created writing rubrics/progressions/continuum  Teacher's College created reading rubrics and assessments  Teacher created assessments  Algebra for All 0  Our students are involved in many activities that help them become well rounded students and foster learning through different outlets. We collaborate with many organizations and students are active members of the community. We have connections which foster charity, empathy, sportsmanship, community and personal accountability. Our Partnerships include The Broad Channel Athletic Club, Ridgewood Savings Bank, NY Historical Society, Lincoln Center, Ballet Tech, Gateway National Park, The 100 th Precinct Chess Club, We.org, City Harvest, and American Heart Association. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Education students account for 23.17% of the student population. Their needs are specific to the individual student however patterns indicate that 39% of our special needs population are below standards on the NYS ELA exam for the 2017-2018 school year. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. PS 47 made the most gains in the area of Collaborative Teachers, Supportive Environment and Trust. Through our strong professional learning calendar focusing on team teaching, lesson planning and unit planning with Teacher's College. Our focus this year will be rigorous instructional goals. With one year under our belt with Teacher's College planning, our goal will be to focus now on improving the implementation of the new strategies of which the teachers were trained. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q047 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 216 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 7 7 12 2 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 20 11 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 34.0% % Attendance Rate 29.6% % Reduced Lunch 1.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 18.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 78.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.97 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 60.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 96% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 29 21 2 93.5% 4.6% 25.5% 1.4% 0.5% 1.4% 2 29% 7.1 54.8% 80% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Using the Teacher's College Assessment, approximately 74% are on or above level 3&4 at the end of the year. The students move 3 levels on average 88% of them time however, more students should be above level. However, based on the Student Achievement Data, our state scores to not coincide with these high percentages and decreases as the students move to middle school from 60.9% to 33.3%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of the teachers college running records assessment, there will be a 10% increase (from 74% to 84%) in the percentage of students reading at or above grade level as measured by the end of the year 2019 Teacher's College Running Record Assessments. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). STRUCTURES for CHANGE Teachers Initial planning conferences support teacher development by following the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Students Action plan goals by teachers to develop strategies to increase reading levels. Develop rubrics that support student learning by providing expectations for reading skills. Unit plans for Teacher's college will be created and modified throughout the year. Literature Circles and guided reading that focus on routine discussion techniques that students can utilize. Develop model teachers and inter visitations. STRATEGIES for All Learners Teacher made assessments targeting students with disabilities and English Language Learners that allow for reading skills on thier level. Socratic Circles and Text Talk circles as part of weekly reading class. Scheduling of AIS teachers to push in to the classroom to facilitate small group instruction and guided reading Flexible scheduling for special education students. myON computer software Small group differentiated instruction for students 2 reading levels below grade level. Administration Teachers RTI providers AIS providers September 2018 midyear benchmark in February, 2019 and final June 2019. All students Teachers September 2018- midyear benchmark in February, 2019 and final June 2019. Administration Teachers RTI providers AIS providers 4 Students Teachers Parents/guardians September 2018- midyear benchmark in February, 2019 and final June 2019. Administration Teachers RTI providers AIS providers Parent Coordinator Progress monitoring monthly to assess for movement PARENT INVOLVEMENT Parents will receive progress reports indicating Teachers college progress reports and grade expectations 4 times per year. Parent coordinator will act as a liaison between parents, teachers, students and the community. Strengthen home school connection through a learning workshop for parents on teaching reading skills at home. Parent visits throughout the school year with in the classroom during reading periods and debates for middle school. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In the beginning of the year, Assistant Principal and parent coordinator will have a parent meeting regarding the teacher's college assessment. The meeting will entail supplemental reading programs we have such as Fundations and Wilson which will help move our students reading levels. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project, AIS teacher scheduled for small group instruction, flexible grouping and station teaching, student rubric includes comprehension strategies and reading levels and Per Diem subs for in house professional learning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 5  By February 2019, at least 25% will have already met the annual goal based on Teacher's College Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher's College Reading and Writing Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? PS 47 scores higher than the district and the city on the NYS Math exam, however according to the NYC School Survey, only 54.9% scored on or above level on the NYS Math Exam. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of the 4-8 students will be on or above level in explaining their reasoning as measured by teacher made assessments by incorporating a supportive classroom culture of guided and shared math activities into daily instruction that aligns with the Algebra for All methodology so that all students, including ELLs and SWDs, can feel supported in independently demonstrate math understanding of concepts. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). STRUCTURES for CHANGE Students Grades K-8 Professional Learning structures for the Algebra for ALL learning project. Teachers Professional learning in and out of the school building with Algebra for All Strategies. Algebra for All model teachers and inter visitation. Teacher team focus on performance tasks aligned with the Algebra for All program. Coaching Algebra for All beginning in grade 6. Regents Prep classes September 2018-June 2019 Administration Teachers RTI providers AIS providers STRATEGIES for All Learners Students Grades K-8 Goal setting for Students with Disabilities that focuses on explaining their reasoning. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Scaffolding performance tasks for Students with Disabilities. Multiple entry points included in all lesson plans. Paraprofessionals will be utilized to perform additional academic and social support. Administration Teachers RTI providers AIS providers 8 Small group instruction that target lowest third of the class Progress monitoring of students Algebra for All lesson structure PARENT INVOLVEMENT Students Grades K-8 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Parent coordinator offering a variety of workshops to assist at home with writing. Parents/Guardians Skedula providing daily updates of progress to parents. Middle School meeting with Regents updates, information and input. Administration Teachers RTI providers AIS providers Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent coordinator along with the Master Algebra teachers meeting with the parents of grades 4-8 to explain the Algebra for All agenda as well as introduce the plan for the Algebra Regents to be given in 8th grade. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Algebra for All professional learning. After school per session for Algebra for All and regents planning. AIS support. Math coach beginning in grade 6. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, at least 50% of the students will independently express math reasoning as assessed by teacher made "Algebra for All" aligned performance assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 9  Teacher made "Algebra for All" Performance Assessment in February 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per the NYC School Survey, 65% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas. According to the Advance Teacher Rating system from June 2018, 36.6% of our teachers scored highly effective overall in the area of designing coherent instruction. The overall rating for their observation total is 86.3% rated effective or higher. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 27Q047 will provide at least 4 professional development sessions which will result in a 15% increase (from 65 % to 80 %) in the percent of teachers who will agree or strongly agree that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas.as measured by the results of the 2019 NYC School Survey. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration Teachers RTI providers AIS providers STRUCTURES for CHANGE Develop model teachers through professional learning for Teachers September 2018-June 2019 intervisitation Professional learning on Teacher's College Reading Project Professional learning on Danielson Framework Using videos for professional learning to show best practice and unit planning Goal setting for teachers to improve practice. Effective and prompt feedback from the administration from their observations Teacher teams focus on analyzing the Danielson Framework and brainstorming strategies to improve. STRATEGIES for All Learners Teachers Teacher teams analyze student data to effective differentiate lessons. Using component 3d, Using Assessment in Instruction, to guide multiple entry points. Instructional outcomes should reflect relevant learning and must lend themselves to various forms of assessment September 2018-June 2019 Administration Teachers RTI providers AIS providers 2 through which all students must demonstrate understanding of the lesson. PARENT INVOLVEMENT Open school classroom visits. Open communication about expectations within the classroom. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration Teachers RTI providers AIS providers PA meetings informing parents of overall improvements Parent Coordinator and initiatives within the school in particular the use of Teacher's College Staff Developers entering the building. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teacher's College Staff Developers will be in the building and will work with the Parent Coordinator for simple strategies for the parents to supplement the writing in October 2018 and March 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher's College Staff Developer planning time Initial planning meetings Teacher team goal setting Inter-visitation scheduling Per Diem funding for outside professional learning opportunities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 3  By February, 2019 60% of the teachers will have attended at least 2 professional development sessions that will also have served as a teacher team focus for the month. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher's College completed unit plans, Danielson Advance Teacher Rating system Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per the NYC School Survey, 60% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers. According to the Framework for Great Schools, leading the professional growth of teachers and staff and giving instructional and social-emotional support drives student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 27Q047 will provide time for the instructional leads to meet with administration at least 6 times regarding the new Algebra curriculum which will result in an 18% increase (from 60% to 78%) in the percent of teachers who will agree or strongly agree that the principal at their school participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers as measured by the results of the 2019 NYC School Survey. 5 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration Teachers Administration RTI providers AIS providers AA Coaches Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  STRATEGIES for CHANGE Administrators will norm and reflect on teacher observations and outcomes and provide professional learning opportunities to improve student outcomes. During common preps and grade level meetings, teachers will examine student learning styles, interests, and abilities to guarantee effective assessment. Pairing with mentor teacher in different school to assist in the regents lesson planning. Algebra for All professional learning Teacher team lesson plans that include questions intended to assess for understanding throughout the lesson before being taught. Positive letters to teachers to acknowledge increased effort in assessing the students outside of the observations. Academic expectation meetings that foster conversations with administration and teacher of the student levels with in the class. Regents prep classes given outside of instructional time. STRATEGIES for All Learners Teachers Co teaching models evident in lesson planning Focused word walls instructional strategies September 2018-June 2019 Administration Teachers RTI providers 6  Multiple Entry points with in lesson plans Flexible grouping throughout the lesson Reteaching groups based on data PARENT INVOLVEMENT Weekly parent communication to discuss student levels and progress. Parent workshops to increase level of progress based on what the assessments reveal in the classroom. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 AIS providers AA coaches Administration Teachers RTI providers AIS providers Parent letter explaining assessment levels Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Middle School meeting regarding regents prep classes and information to be given in October 2018. Progress reports given on January 2019 for students in Regents class. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, teachers and students Regularly scheduled team meetings Algebra for All and regents coaching Grade meetings Per Session for professional learning Per Diem for inter-visitations and team collaborations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 7  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, Administration's instructional team will have met at least 3 times for collaborative planning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets, informal survey for teacher feedback, Advance teaching system for planning and preparation. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 NYC school survey, 73% of our parents completed the school survey. PS/MS 47 reflects 95% of our parents responded that they agreed strongly that school staff regularly communicated with them as to how to help their child. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase of 2% in our overall score in the area of strong family and community ties as measured by the school survey by implementing Class Dojo as a tool to increase communication between home and school. 9 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018-June 2019 parents/ Families Teachers Administration Teachers RTI providers AIS providers Parent Coordinator Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). STRATEGIES for CHANGE Meet the teacher night Parent Teacher conferences School leadership team PA meetings and membership High School Articulation Open school week Parent visits Class presentations Special Assemblies Bake sales Holiday events Preschool carnival Performing Arts Club Book Fairs Hoops for Heart Art Expo Class parents/Volunteers 0 STRATEGIES for All Learners Parents/ ● Tuesday outreach to parents regarding their progress Families ● Encourage class presentations based on interest and ability for all learners to in still pride and ownership in their work. Teachers ● Have award ceremonies for attendance, behavior and effort to honor all students for their strengths. PARENT INVOLVEMENT ● Blackboard phone system to increase communication about events ● Have PA events coincide with report cards to encourage attendance. Parents/ Families Teachers Parents September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administration Teachers RTI providers AIS providers Parent Coordinator Administration Teachers RTI providers AIS providers ● Family events before PA meetings Parent Coordinator Skedula for school wide grades and interaction ● Increase classroom presentations ● Increase class trips with parent volunteers ● Increase special assemblies ● Tuesday Afternoon parental outreach. ● Parent coordinator workshops ● Parent book clubs ● Monthly school newsletter 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. BCAC, Gateway National Park Service, WE.org, First Congregational Food Pantry, Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, staff and administration collaboration for workshops for parents. Open school scheduling 1  Grant writing Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will see that 50% of our parent community and teachers are registered and using the Class Dojo System. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent and teacher sign up results on Class Dojo. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher's College Reading Assessment, Teacher's College rubrics, state exam results, benchmark exams, classroom anecdotals. Go Math reteaching program, state exams, benchmark analysis supports from various sources. Harcourt chapter tests, Harcourt portfolio assessments and focus question responses. Department of Education Social Studies unit projects and performance based assessments. Students are provided on-site services in individual and group settings. Topics such as working in a group, respect, socialization, parent separation issues, and ethnic Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Fundations reading program, Teacher's College reading and writing project, Wilson, myON, Reading partners Skills review, Foundations of math work, fluency prep from various math sources, Think Central. Repeated readings, supplemental readings for research Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group instruction for 1-3 students for RTI, Guided groups of 5-6 students and one on one tutoring during AIS periods. Small group of 5-6 students When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school day. During the school day. Small group instruction of 5-6 students During the school day. Modified group projects, supplemental readings for research Small groups of 4-5 students. During the school day. Peer mediation and group work Small group counseling as well as 1:1 counseling. During the school day. 3  and cultural topics are addressed. 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5  The student was given school materials and supplies. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $4,554.00 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 7  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 8  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 47, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 47 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 0  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; 1  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Ps 47, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; 2  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 3  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 4  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name The Chris Galas School Borough select one School Number 47 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Heather Lorenz Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher N/A Teacher/Subject Area Tanya Alarcon/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Joanne Skier Related-Service Provider Marcy Nussbaum Superintendent Mary Barton Assistant Principal Kate Gallagher Coach N School Counselor Bridgette Edwards Parent Ruth Trudden Parent Coordinator Rachel Colleran Field Support Center Staff Member Marlene Wilkes Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 222 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 5 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.25% 6  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessments that we use are Teachers College Reading Assessment, Nyseslat, Nysitell, and Benchmark Assessments. These assessments allow for one on one testing that show the teacher not only the level of the student regarding their English Language but also whether the teacher can push the student to assess for disabilities. The ELL assessments such as the Nysitell and Nyselat give a range of levels which then form the scheduling of an ENL teacher. The Teacher's College levels guide the reading groups and literature circles. These groups occur within the classroom outside of the ENL instruction that reinforces what is being taught by the classroom teacher. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Weekly professional Learning on ELL strategies to staff, Advance Teacher rating system regarding designing coherent instruction including ELL strategies, EILI workshops for new teachers and administrators, ENL periods scheduled to meet the required compliance 7  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use the NYSESLAT to determine how much progress the student has made since entering the school system, along with our Teacher's College benchmarks and running records. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Response to Intervention, one to one tutoring, comprehension tools, professional learning on ELLs, ENL free standing periods. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Students who score 2 levels below grade standard on the teacher's College benchmark are given separate RTI services including ELLs. AIS periods are built into the classroom schedule with pushin from reading specialist. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Not enough of students with services for a period of time to observe patterns that we can utilize effectively. Students that are at PS 47 are spread out in grade level and ENL level. The data reveals that the lower grades need more services than the upper grade students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Testing coordinator administers official benchmarks such as NYSITELL. The LAC and Teacher meet with the parent to discuss options. The results are scanned into ATS. Teachers are given the official amount of periods the student needs. The ENL teacher is scheduled to service the student. Follow up benchmarks are given throughout the year to address needs and small group instruction such as RTI and AIS. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In Stand-alone ENL, students receive English Language Development taught by a New York State certified ESOL teacher in order to acquire the English Language needed for success in core content areas. Push/In-Pull/out model where a teacher enters the general education classroom and provides ELL support in core content areas. Since the school has only one class on a grade and a total of 5 ELL students as of September 2017, the students are grouped by class in a heterogeneous grouping. All students are serviced one on one in the push in/pull out model, except for 2 students in grade 2 that are serviced in a group of 2. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 8  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We are using the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results to determine the level and using charts 5.1 and 5.2 to determine the mandated units of study for each students. In Stand-alone ENL, students receive English Language Development taught by a New York State certified ESOL teacher in order to acquire the English Language needed for success in core content areas in units of study based on state standards. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In Stand-alone ENL, students receive English Language Development taught by a New York State certified ESOL teacher in order to acquire the English Language needed for success in core content areas. The core content is delivered in English using the push-in/push-out model. ENL service is delivered in English. Each content area has their own standards. The supporting teacher as well as the classroom teacher provides necessary scaffolds for the students to be able to master the content. This is evident through differentiation, small group instruction and individualized tools for the student based on the number of periods the child needs for push-in. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? As of September 2017, we do not have students that need tests within their home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status PS 47 has 1:1 instruction based on level due to the small amount of students in each grade. Depending on their ELL level as well as their age, teacher applies ENL strategies by using charts, books written in their first language, simplified text written by the teacher, discussion prompts, dictionaries, visuals, and online resources such as Google translate as well as EILI professional development techniques. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Depending on their ELL level as well as their age, teacher applies ENL strategies by using charts, books written in their first language, simplified text written by the teacher, discussion prompts, dictionaries, visuals, and online resources such as Google translate as well as EILI professional development techniques. ENL teacher push-in model during content areas 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Depending on their ELL level as well as their age, teacher applies ENL strategies by using charts, books written in their first language, simplified text written by the teacher, discussion prompts, dictionaries, visuals, and online resources such as google translate as well as EILI professional development techniques. Students learn the curriculum and units of study with the supports of an ENL stand alone program. IEP goals are updated every 6 weeks and all teachers have copy of IEP as per Chapter 408. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Response to Intervention groups, Guided Reading, Push-in/Pull-out/ and mainstreaming, fundations, one to one tutoring all in English because that is the need of the building. All based on Benchmark levels and running record checks. 9  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are happy with the push-in/pull out model and scheduled our teachers more effectively in the subject areas. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are included in all programs offered by school and offered supports where necessary. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Teachers College Writing, Ready Gen, Go Math, Fundations, Laptops, word walls and dictionaries. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? N/A 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. NYSITELL assessment and scheduling of ENL teacher as supervised by the Administration in the building. Compliance checks multiple times a year. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Parent workshops given by the parent coordinator. Parent communication on Tuesdays by teacher. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All that are in the guidelines of the ELL Policy and Reference Guide. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating 0  language and content instruction for English language learners. Our ELL provider attends outside professional development given by the FSC and Central. These professional learning activities are turn keyed to the staff on Monday afternoons. They include description of the testing, differentiation strategies and the 7 co teaching models that are necessary for ENL instruction. The ELL provider attends outside professional development given by the BFSC and Central and turnkeys the material on Mondays during professional learning. The focus is on the co teaching models for ENL instruction as well as differentiation of instruction to not only support SWD but also ENL students. The parent coordinator attends LAC meetings. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We would ensure that the parents are aware that all students including English language learners are placed into graduation cohorts based on the first time they enter high school (or the equivalent) anywhere in the world. A student’s cohort year is fixed, and represents the 9th grade school year. However, in special circumstances, an ELL can be placed in a cohort other than his or her actual high school entry year. This exception applies only to English language learners who fulfill certain criteria, outlined in the High School Academic Policy Guide. The parents need to be aware that there are some policies that schools should pay particular attention to when scheduling ELLs and considering graduation requirements. While all ELLs are expected to fulfill the course and exam requirements necessary to earn a diploma in New York State, some students are entitled to services and supports, including testing accommodations. In addition, ELLs who enroll in any United States school for the first time in grades 9-12 and who meet other specific eligibility requirements may appeal to graduate with a lower score on the ELA exam. The parents should be made aware of this through the high school policy guide. Our ELL provider attends outside professional development given by the FSC and Central. Agendas and Attendance are kept in professional learning binder. The ENL teachers are provided with professional development on co teaching models, differentiation strategies and ENL supports implemented within core content. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Tuesday conferences with parents to discuss progress. Each parent is met with on a minimum of once a year when they first enroll and beginning of the year at a parent meeting however within PS 47 due to the number of ENL students, the teachers meet and speak with the parents numerous times a month. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The parent coordinator holds parent workshops and book clubs for the parents so the parents can socialize with other parents, understand curriculum and events and activities in the school their child can and is participating in. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 1  2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Heather Lorenz, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Chris Galas School DBN: 27Q047 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Heather Lorenz Title Principal Kate Gallagher Assistant Principal Rachel Colleran Parent Coordinator Anita Bahor ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ruth Trudden Parent Melanie Moath/K Teacher/Subject Area Tanya Alarcon/ELA Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Bridegette Edwards School Counselor Mary Barton FSC N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Marlene Wilkes Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q047 School Name: PS 47 Chris Galas Superintendent: Mary Barton The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Katherine Gallagher- Assistant Principal- Yes- - - - - - - - - - - - - yes- - - - * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use the Home Language Survey to determine the language that the parent prefers for communication from the school. 100% of our parents choose English as their language of choice for communication. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 5  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Chinese - - 221 1 - - 99.97 0.03 - - 221 1 - - 99.97 0.03 - - 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families School Notices/Event notices Multiple How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. -Translation services/bilingual pedagogue - - - - - - - - - 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Meet the teacher night: Sept 26, 2017, Sept 26, 2017 - -November 30, 2017 Parent Teacher Conferences November 17, March 3 and May 12 March 15, 2018 May 17, 2018 interpretation service(s)? Translation Services/Family Member/Bilingual pedagogue Translation Services/family Member/Bilingual pedagogue -Orientation meetings with ELL Parents - September 26, 2018 Translation Services/Family Member/Bilingual pedagogue 6  -PTA meetings-Last Tuesday of every month. Multiple Translation services/Family Member/Bilingual pedagogue Parent Workshops-Monthly on Friday mornings Tuesday Afternoon-Parent Engagement times by staff 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. A bilingual pedagogue on staff Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Monday professional learning on the translation unit, phone numbers, access on DOE, and protocols with translation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In the event of a new student, translation will be provided by a bilingual pedagogue or translation services Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent survey 7 
